THE

SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

DONE INTO ENGLISH BY

ARTHUR GEORGE WARNER, M.A.

AND

EDMOND WARNER, B.A.

‘* The homes that are the dwellings of to-day
Will sink neath shower and sunshine to decay,
But storm and rain shall never mar what I
Have buili—the palace of my poetry.”

Firpaust

VOL, I

 

LONDON
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO. L™

DRYDEN HOUSE, GERRARD STREET, W.
1905
The rights of translation and of reproduction are reserved

Printed by BaLLanrrngE, Hanson '&* Co.
At the Ballantyne Press
TRUBNER’S
ORIENTAL SERIES.
TO
HIS SISTER
CAROLINE WARNER
THIS WORK IS DEDICATED BY HER

SURVIVING BROTHER
PREFACE

THE interest with which I used to look forward to
the publication of this work, the preparation of which
afforded us innumerable happy hours, has been
saddened for me of late by the death of my elder
brother and senior partner in the undertaking. It
was begun some twenty years ago when he was the
Incumbent of St. Mary’s, Tothill Fields, Westminster,
and had but scanty leisure. It was continued and
carried far toward completion in more favourable
circumstances after his presentation by the Grocers’
Company to the living of St. Mary le Bow, Cheapside,
In 1887.

From early days my brother was devoted to the
study of Oriental languages. His proficiency in
Hebrew won him at Oxford the Pusey and Ellerton
Scholarship in 1862 and the Kennicott in 1863.
He was also a good Arabic and Syriac scholar.
During his twenty-one laborious years first as Curate
and then Incumbent at Westminster he never, I
think, forewent for long his favourite branch of study,
and I may add that we were engaged in revising a
passage in our joint translation almost to within an
hour of his sudden death from a wholly unsuspected
heart-affection in April 1903.

He is, I think, fondly remembered by many. Such

vil
viii ‘PREFACE
memories are in the nature of things but fleeting; but
the written word remains, and I am fain to hope that
by the publication of this work I may be raising to
him an inconspicuous perhaps but lasting monument.

To the vast majority of English readers the Shdah-
nama seems hardly to be known even by name—a
fact not to be wondered at, considering how few
references are made to it in current literature, and
that this is actually the first attempt to give the
subject-matter of the great Persian Epic at large in
English. It has therefore seemed desirable that the
translation should be accompanied by explanatory
matter in the forms of Introduction, Note, and
Argument. To prepare these has fallen to my lot,
and I am accordingly responsible for the many faults
of commission and omission that will be only too
obvious to the eyes of scholars and experts in this
branch of the subject. I am also responsible with
my brother for the translation generally, and for its
final form throughout. His share, had he lived,
would have been larger and more important than mine,
but his untimely death will tend to equalise our
labours. On reviewing our work as a whole, I venture
to hope that the English reader will gain from it
a very fairly correct idea of the subject-matter of
Firdausi’s greatest achievement, and will at least learn
from the Introduction and Introductory Notes where
to turn for more scholarly and authoritative informa-
tion on the subject.

I take this opportunity of thanking the Delegates
of the Clarendon Press for their kind permission to
PREFACE 1x

make such illustrative extracts as I needed from
those volumes of the Sacred Books of the East Series
which contain the translations of the Zandavasta and
Pahlavi Texts by the late Professor Darmesteter and
the late Dr. E. W. West respectively. These transla-
tions, with their introductions and notes, are most
valuable to the student of the Shéhndma. I have
also to thank my sister, Caroline Warner, and my
nephew, George Redston Warner, for occasional help.

I hope to publish our translation a volume at a
time, as circumstances permit.

EDMOND WARNER.

ELTHAM, February 1905.
CONTENTS

PREFACE

INTRODUCTION

CHarterR I.: LanD AND PEROPLE
CuHapter II.: Port anp Porm
CHapter II].: Text anp TRANSLATION

List OF PREVIOUS TRANSLATORS
ANCIENT PERSIAN CALENDAR
GENEALOGICAL TABLES .
ABBREVIATIONS .

Note oN PRONUNCIATION

THE SHAHNAMA

THe PRELUDE—

a
4

. Invocation .

Discourse in Praise of Wisdom ;

. Of the Making of the World

. Of the Nature of Man

. Of the Nature of the Sun

. Of the Nature of the Moon

. In Praise of the Prophet and his Companions
. On the Compilation of the Shahn4ma

. Of the poet Dakiki

. How the present Book was begun

. In Praise of Abt’ Mansur, Son of Muhammad
12. In Praise of Sultén Mahinud

xi

OW oN AM hw DN

— ind
- O

PAGE
Vil

23
76

87
88
go
93
95
xil CONTENTS

THE BEGINNING OF THE HISTORY: THE
PISHDADIAN DYNASTY

GaltMaRT—
SECT. PAGE
1. The Greatness of Gaiimart and the Envy of
hriman . . , . 118
2. How Siyamak was slain by the Div . | 120
3. How Hushang and Gaitimart went to fight the Black
Div . . . . . . . , . 121
HtsHane—
1, The Accession of Hushang and his civilising Arts . 122
2. How the Feast of Sada was founded” . ; 123
TaAHMOURAS—
1. Tahmuras ascends the Throne, invents new Arts,
subdues the Divs, and dies. . 126
J aMSH{D— r
. The Greatness and Fall of J amshid , . 131
2. The Story of Zahhak and his Father . 135
3. How Iblis turned Cook . 137
4. How the Fortunes of Jamshid went to “Wrack 139
ZAHHAK—
1. The Evil Customs of Zahhak and the Device of Irma’il_
and Karma’il . . ; ; ; . 145
2. How Zabhak saw Faridun in a Dream: . 147
_3. The Birth of Faridin . 150
4. How Faridtin questioned his Mother about his Origin 152
5. The Story of Zahhak and K4wa the Smith . 154
6. How Faridin went to Battle with Zahhak . 159
7. How Faridin saw the Sisters of Jamshid . , 161
8. The Story of Faridin and the Minister of Zahhak . 164
9. How Faridun bound Zahhak . 166
Farfptn—
1. How Faridun ascended the Throne 174

2. How Faridin sent Jandal to Yaman . 177
CONTENTS

FaRIDUn (contenued)—
SECT.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18,
19.

20.
21.
22.

23.
24.

25.
206.

27.

. How the King of Yaman answered Jandal
. How the Sons of Faridin went to the King of

Yaman.

. How Sarv proved the Sons of Farfduin by Sorcery

. How Faridin made Trial of his Sons

. How Faridun divided the World among his Sons

. How Salm grew envious of Traj ; .

. How Salm and Tur sent a Message to Faridun .

. How Faridiin made Answer to his Sons

. How Iraj went to his Brothers

. How Iraj was slain by his Brothers .
. How Faridun received Tidings of the Murder of

Traj
How a Daughter was Born to ivaj
‘The Birth of Mintchihr
How Salm and Tur had Tidings of Mimichihr .
How Faridun received his Sons’ Message
How Fariduin made Answer to his Sons

How Faridin sent Minuchihr to fight Tar and
Salm .

How Miniuchihr attacked the Host of Tar.
How Tur was slain by Minuchihr

How Minuchihr wrote to announce his Victory to
Faridin

How Karan took the Castle of the Alans

How Kakwi, the Grandson of Zalhhak, attacked
the frénians . . .

How Salm fled and was slain by Mintchihr

How the Head of Salm was sent to Faridin

The Death of Faridin

MintcHigR—

I.

SS

How Minuchihr ascended the Throne and made an
Oration

. The Birth of Zal

. How Sdm had a Dream touching the Case of his
Son .

. How Minichihr took Knowledge of the Case of
Sam and Zal . . ,

xil)

PAGE

-_

18]

183
184
186
189
189
IQ!
193
197
199

202
205
206
208
209
211

215
218
220

221
223

225
227
229
232

237
239

243

248
xiv

CONTENTS

MINUCHIBR (contenued)—

SECT.

. How Zl went back to Zabulistan

. How Sd4m gave the Kingdom to Zal .

. How Zal visited Mihrab of Kabul

. How Riiddba took Counsel with her Damsels

. How Rudaba’s Damsels went to see Zal

. How the Damsels returned to Rudaba

. How Zal went to Ruiddaba . .

. How Zl consulted the Archimages in the Matter of

13.
[4.

15.
16.

18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23
24.
25.
26.

27.
28.
29.
30.
31.
32.
33:

34-
35:

Rudaba .
How Zal wrote to Sdm to explain the Case

How Sam consulted the Archmages in the Matter of
Zil

How Sindukht heard of the Case of Rudéba

How Mihrab was made aware of his Daughter's
Case

. How Minichihr heard of the Case of Zal and

Ruidéba
How Sam came to Mimichihr
How Sam went to fight with Mihrab.
How Zal went on a Mission to Minuchihr .
How Mihrab was wroth with Sindukht
How Sim comforted Sindukht . .
How Zal came to Minutchihr with Sam’s Leiter
How the Archmages questioned ZAl .
How Za] answered the Archmages

How ZAél displayed his Accomplishment before
Mintchihr . : . .

Mintchihr’s Answer to Sam’s Letter
How Zl came to S4m

The Story of the Birth of Rustam
How Sam came to see Rustam

How Rustam slew the White Elephant
How Rustam went to Mount Sipand .

How Rustam wrote a Letter announcing his Victory
to Zdl .

The Letter of Zl to S4m .
Mintichihr’s last Counsels to.his Son .

PAGE
251

253
256
259
263
267
270

273
275

278
280

284

288
289
292
295
299
301
306
308
309

311
314
316
320
324
327
33°

332
334
335
CONTENTS

NaupAaR—

SEOT.
1.

_ PWN

13.

ZAV—
I.

How Naudar succeeded to the Throne

. How Pashang heard of the Death of Mintchibr
. How Afrdsiy&b came to the Land of Irdén .
. How Barman and Kubad fought together and how

Kubad was slain.

. How Afrésiyab fought with Naudar the second Time
. How Naudar fought with Afrasiyab the third Time .

How Naudar was taken by Afrasiyéb

. How Wisa found his Son that had been slain

. How Shamé4sas and Khazarwdn invaded Zabulistan .
. How Zal came to help Mihrab

. How Naudar was slain by Afrasiyab .

. How Zal had Tidings of the Death of Naudar .

How Ighriras was slain by his Brother

Zav is elected Shah

GARSHASP—

2.
3.
4.

. How Garsh4sp succeeded to the Throne and died,
and how Afrasiyab invaded Irén

How Rustam caught Rakhsh
How Zal led the Host against Afrdsiyab .
How Rustam brought Kai Kubad from Mount Alburz

INDEX .

XV

PAGK

339
342
345

379

374
378
381
382

389
INTRODUCTION
ERRATA

Page 7, line 25 and elsewhere, for ‘Trité’ and ‘ Traitdna’ read ‘ Trita’
and ‘ Traitana.’ ,

Page 9, line 16 and elsewhere, for ‘ Azarbijén’ read ‘ Azarbdijan. ’

Page 10, reference number 2, after R insert P.

Page 13, bottom, for ‘NESH’ read ‘ NSEH.’

Page 17, delete lines 8-10, and read ‘from the other side, we may add
that Peter the Great gained temporary possession of Darband
in A.D. 1722, but it was not finally annexed by Russia till a.n.
1813.’

Page 19, reference number 3, delete ili.

Page 31, delete lines 13-16, and read ‘that this minister is referred to
on both occasions.’

Page 34, five lines from bottom, delete ‘While I sat looking on’ and
read * While I o’erlooked from far.’

Page 37, line 22, for ‘ Aridi’ read ‘’ Aridi.’

Page 39, reference number 1, delete §§ i. and vii. and read ‘ The too
spiritual conception of the Deity in § i. and the references to
"Alf in § vii.’

Page 43, note 2, for ‘fakka’ read ‘ fakkd’.’

Page 62, after reference number 7 insert DZA, i. 200.

Page 68, line 9, end, add ‘or identical with,’ and add to reference
number 1, NIN, 15.

Page 69, bottom, for ‘108’ read ‘ 107.’

Page 71, line 19, after ‘Oxus’ insert ‘ Caspian,’

» » Yeference number 6, end, add ‘ notes.’

Page 88, lines 12 and 26, for ‘ Farvardin’ read ‘ Farwardin.’

Page 89, line 4, for ‘ Din’ read ‘ Dai.’

Page 90, for ‘3 generations’ read ‘1 generation.’

Page 92, read thus: ‘A female descendant or relative= Kar KAUts (12).’

Siydiwush
Page 106, line 11, beginning, for ‘ The’ read ‘ Jn.’
Page 113, line 18, add full stop at end.
Page 118, line 4, for ‘mountain of the holy’ read ‘Mountain of the
Holy.’
Page 120, delete line 1 and read, ‘ How Siydmak was slain by the Div,’
Page 126, line 16, for ‘gold’ read ‘ good.’
Page 130, line 11, after ‘gallery’ put...
ERRATA

Page 130, line 23, for ‘ have’ read ‘ find,’ and add to reference 4, WPI.
i. 142.
Page 131, line 15, for‘ They’ read ‘ they.’
Page 132, line 11, add full stop at end.
Page 138, line 29, delete ‘thou my’ and read ‘ any.’
Page 142, 5 lines from bottom, for ‘downstricken’ read ‘down-stricken.’
» 4 Hnes from bottom, for * Aspikén’ read ° Aspikén.’
Page 143, line 7, for ‘1’ read ‘2.’
»» 9) line 15, for ‘2’ read ‘3.’
»» yy line 31, for ‘3’ read ‘4.
» 9s line 33, for ‘4’ read ‘5.’
Page 175, line 13, for ‘He’ read ‘ Be.’
Page 227, line 21, delete ‘ Slazn by the Hand of’ and read ‘ slain by.’
Page 239, line 21, for ‘made’ read ‘ make.’
Page 293, add to end of note, 309, 346.
Page 307, line 7 from bottom, after ‘lasso’ add ‘},’
Page 325, line 11, for ‘Sdm’ read ‘ Zl.’
Page 342, line 3 from bottom, for ‘Knowhow’ read ‘ Know how.’
Page 351, side reference, read ‘259.’
Page 354, line 21, for ‘Guzhdaham’ read ‘ Gazhdaham.’
Page 355, line 4 from bottom, delete comma at end.
Page 366, line 12, delete ‘ not.’
Page 381, line 4 from bottom, for ‘ plants? read ‘ plans.’
INTRODUCTION

CHAPTER I
LAND AND PEOPLE

frin, the chief scene of Firdausi’s Shdhnama, is
bounded on the north by the Steppes, the Caspian
Sea, and the Kur and Rion rivers, on the south by
the Indian Ocean, on the east by the valley of the
Indus, and on the west by that of the Tigris and
Kuphrates, and by the Persian Gulf. At present it
includes Persia, Afghanistan, Baluchistan, and small
portions of Russia and Turkey.

It is a lofty and for the most part a rainless table-
land traversed by numerous mountain-ranges divided
from each other by flat plains and falling away toward
the centre, which is a desert white with salt scurf
or dun with powdery dust. The mountains are
highest round the edges of the tableland and intercept
most of the rainfall. Some moisture, however, finds
its way even into the rainless region, where it gathers
during winter on the higher hills in the form of snow.
This snow-water is carefully husbanded, and distributed
by means of underground water-courses. The interior
is, however, drying up, and city, village, and cultivated
field are being gradually overwhelmed in dust and
shifting sands.

Possibly as late as early historical times very
3
4 INTRODUCTION

different conditions prevailed. The lower plains and
depressions once formed a series of lakes that
suggested the appearance of an inland sea, and such
names as island, port, lighthouse, &c., are said to still
survive in places as a relic and indication of the old
state of things,) while a considerable body of water
is still to be found in the eastern half of the central
depression on the frontier between Persia and Afghanis-
tan. This region is now known as Sistan, but in ancient
times was called Drangiana or the lake-country, a
name which survived much later in its former capital
Zarang, and as “ Zirih” is still used in connection with
its lake.

From April till late in the autumn the sky, save
for an occasional thunderstorm among the mountains,
is an unclouded azure, in winter a good deal of snow
falls, and in spring the thunderstorms are heavy and
frequent. The air is, as a rule, remarkably healthy,
but on the borders of the deserts the inhabitants
have sometimes to live shut up for weeks together to
avoid the pestilential blasts.’

The favoured regions are those that front west and
north respectively. They are splendidly wooded and
extremely fertile, all the ordinary flowers and fruits
of Europe do well, while in the district between the
Alburz Mountains and the Caspian, and known as
Mazandaran, the climate is semitropical and the
vegetation most luxuriant. Here rice, the sugar-cane,
the vine, the orange, and the olive flourish? In the
few watered valleys of the long southern coast the
climate is tropical in character. The tamarisk and
mimosa are largely represented, and here and there
are groves of date-palms.

1 F#.g., near Kasbin, on the road between Tihrén and Hamadin, and at
Barchin, a village near Maibud to the north of Yazd. GHP, i. 13;
Ka, li. 473.

2 MHP, ii. 367. 5’ DHA, V. 9.
INTRODUCTION 5

The immediate neighbourhood of the salt-deserts is
the haunt of the wild ass or onager and of the antelope,
the slope of the mountain-ranges of the wild sheep or
argali, and their summit of the wild goat or ibex. The
tracts artificially reclaimed and watered are the
favourite home of the sandgrouse, and the highlands
of the eagle, the vulture, the falcon, the raven, the
crow, and the nightingale—the bulbul of the poets.
The acorns of the western slopes attract the wild
swine, which in turn tempt the lion from the reed-beds
of the Tigris and the cover of its tributaries. Swine,
too, abound in Mazandaran and afford food for the
tiger which flourishes there, the dense undergrowth
and vegetation of that region affording it as good
shelter as an Indian jungle.2 Here, too, are found
deer, bufialo, swan, waterfowl, woodcock, and pheasant.
Speaking of the country more generally we may add
to this list leopards, wildcats, wolves, bears, hyenas,
foxes, snakes, scorpions, vipers, lizards, the partridge,
and the lark. The chief domestic animals are the ox,
the sheep, especially the fat-tailed variety, the horse,
the camel, and the mule.

[ran is a land of sharp contrasts, of intense heat and
cold, of sudden and abnormal changes of temperature,
of dead level and steep ascent, of splendid fertility hard
by lifeless desolation, of irrigation and dust. Its
natural characteristics find expression in the ancient
cosmogony of its people. We are told that Urmuzd—
the Good Principle—created earth as a lovely plain
bathed in a mild perpetual radiance, fanned by soft
temperate airs, bounteously provided with fresh sweet
waters, and clad in a smooth and harmless vegetation.
Here the First Man and the First Ox dwelt in peace
and happiness. Ahriman—the Evil Principle—broke
into this fair scene and all was changed. Gloom
minged with light, the seasons’ difference began, the

1 EP, ii. 30, 2 Id. 34.
6 INTRODUCTION

seas turned salt, the streams dwindled, the vegetation
grew rough and thorny, dronght came and dust and
desert; mountain-ranges sprang up from the plain,
and the man and ox were stricken with disease and
died; but from the body of the former sprang the
first human pair from whom all the earth was over-
spread, and from the body of the latter all other
harmless, useful, and beautiful animals, while Ahriman
in opposition to these created all noisome and hideous
insects, reptiles, and creatures sharp of fang or claw.
Let us now turn from the land to the people. For
us there is no occasion to discuss questions of race
from any very modern standpoint. For us it 1s rather
what ethnical views. obtained in ancient Iran and
moulded its traditions. As to these there is happily
httle room for doubt, Darius Hystaspis, the founder
of the Persian empire and The Seatoat of its historic
Shéhs, having decided the matter for us. On the
rock of Bihistin he recorded his great achievements
in a trilingual inscription, the languages employed
being ancient Persian, Babylonian, and Scythian. The
obvious explanation of his proceeding is, that he
recognised in the population of his vast empire three
distinct races of mankind, and, regarding language as
distinctive of race, used it to emphasise that great
political fact. In thus distinguishing he followed a
true philological instinct, and his distinctions still
largely obtain at the present day. Each of his three
languages represents a great division of human speech.
His view, as we shall see, agrees with the traditions
and legends of his race, and if some modern Shah were
to restore the empire of Darius, and wished to imitate
the example of his great predecessor, he would still have
to choose languages typical of the same three divisions.
In what follows, therefore, language is made the basis
of classification, and the divisions thus classified are
commonly called the Indo-European, the Semitic, and
INTRODUCTION 7

the Turdnian respectively. It is with peoples of the

ant Tivision Tha We GES" chiefly concerned, and only
so far as these came into contact with peoples of the
other two divisions are we concerned about the
latter.

At the dawn of history we find peoples speaking
languages which, theoretically at all events, may be
traced back to one primitive tongue, holding similar
religious notions and organised politically as inde-
pendent self-governing tribes, in possession of large
geographical areas both in Europe and Asia. They
thus fall into two great divisions—an European and an
Asiatic—and are generally known as the Indo-European
race. The Asiatic branch seems to have occupied in
early times the neighbourhoods of Balkh, Harat, Marv,
and possibly. of Samarkand. It described itself as
Aryan or noble, as opposed to all those with whom it
came into contact, much as the Greeks divided man-
kind into Hellenes and Barbaroi. It was organised
into three orders or castes—priests, warriors, and
husbandmen. Its religion was a frank worship of
personified natural forces. Its priests were fire-priests,
and fire was an especial object of adoration along with
the other beneficent powers of nature—Mitra or
Mithra, Yama or Yima, Trita, Traitana, and others.
Opposed to these were the malignant spirits of drought
and darkness, as, for instance, Azi or Azhi, also known
as Dahaka—the biter, the serpent-fiend. Water was
ever growing scarcer, and drought or plenty turned in
the imagination of a primitive people on the struggle of
the good and evil spirits for its possession. The former
appeared in the lightning-flash, while the gloomy con-
volutions of the thunder-cloud suggested the idea that
fiends in serpent-form were striving to carry off the
precious fluid—the heavenly waters as distinguished
from the earthly waters—-and hinder it from descend-
ing to the help of man. The cloud—the rain-bringer——
8 INTRODUCTION

was perversely regarded as the rain-stealer. The good
spirits hastened to the rescue, the lightning-flash clove
the cloud, and the demons dropped their booty. The
serpent-fiend had to be combated for other reasons too,
for his bite brought fever, disease, and death. Accord-
ingly the divine physician appeared side by side with
the divine hero, Trité with Traita4na, and became, as
we shall see later on, merged into a single personality
in franian legend. Sacrifices were offered, and the
drink-offering of the juice of the Soma or Homa plant
was poured forth. The plant is usually identified as
being the Asclepias acida or Sarcostemma viminale.
The Aryans also worshipped the spirits of their
ancestors, and were believers in what is called sym-
pathetic magic. They thought that injury done to
anything in the remotest way connected with their
own persons would affect themselves injuriously. Even
the knowledge of their name might be turned to their
hurt, and we shall find instances in the poem of children
being brought up unnamed to avoid that contingency.

At a period which cannot be put at less than four
thousand years ago the Aryans themselves divided, and
while a portion descended to the Indus and became the
dominant race in India, the rest remained and gradually
took possession of all that was habitable in the vast
region that consequently became known as the land of
the Aryans or Iran. The Aryans thus became separated
into two branches—an Eastern and a Western. With
the former we are but little concerned; the legendary
story of the latter is the theme of the Shahnama.

Of these Western Aryans the two most famous
peoples have ever been the Medes and Persians.

1 The plant grows in the regions about Samarkand and Balkh in the
north and in Kirmdn in the south. The shoots were pounded in a
mortar, and water being added a greenish liquid was produced, which
having been strained was mixed with milk and barley or wild rice and

allowed to ferment. The product was intoxicating. See GHP, i. 36;
DHA, iv. 53.
INTRODUCTION 9

The Medes, whose modern representatives, if any,
seem to be the Kurds, appear in ancient times to have
been a loose confederation of kindred tribes broken up
into numerous settlements, each under its local head-
man or chief! They seem to have had no supreme
political head or king to unite the race under one
central authority. Their common bond, if any, was a
religious one under their priests, the Magi. According
to their own traditions the original seat of the race was
{ran-vej, i.¢., “Iranian seed,” and this has been well
identified with the district of Karabagh, the ancient
Arran, the Apsavia of the Greeks, between the Kur
and the Aras, where the Anti-Caucasus forms the true
north-western scarp of the tableland of Iran? In
historical times, however, we first find the Medes in

ossession of the province of jan, or, to give it
its ancient title, Atropatene. The Persians occupied
from time immemorial the country on the eastern
shores of the Persian Gulf, now represented by the
modern provinces of Farsistén and Laristan, and were
ruled by kings of the house of Achaemenes. These
two peoples, closely connected as they were by language
and race, became in the days of Darius Hystaspis
dominant in Iran, and to this domination the Medes
appear to have contributed the religious, the Persians
the political, element. Between the Medes and the
Persians lay in ancient times, as we learn from Assyrian
and Babylonian records, other kindred peoples—the
kingdom of Elam, with its capital at Susa, some twenty-
five miles west of the modern Shuster, and the kingdom
of Ellipi, in the neighbourhood of the modern Hamadan.
The franians as a whole were bounded on the west by
Semitic and on the north by Turanian peoples. On the
east they were conterminous with the Aryans of India,
and ultimately they came into contact with the Western

1 The ‘' kings of the Medes” of Jer. xxv. 25.
2 DZA, i. 3 and notes; KA, i. 45.
10 INTRODUCTION

Indo-Europeans as well, notably with the Greeks and
Romans. As the cosmogony and religion of the
[r4nians were largely derived from their physical, so
was their tradition from their ethnical, environment.
We are concerned with all three, but especially with
the last—their tradition. The remainder of the present
chapter will therefore be devoted to a brief, and
necessarily dry, summary of their historical relations
with the Semites as represented by the Assyrians in
early and the Arabs in later times, with other Indo-
European races represented by the Greeks and Romans
in the west and by the Hindus in the east, and with
the Tuiranians as represented by the Kimmerians,
Scythians, Parthians, Huns and Turk
~The Ininians and the Semites—la the numerous
contemporary records of the Assyrians we find many
references to the Iranians. The whole of the western
frontier of Iran, from the Medes in the north to the
Persians in the south, seems to have been subjected at
one point or another to almost constant aggression,
at first by mere raids but later on by attempts at
permanent conquest, at the hands of the great warrior-
monarchs of Nineveh—Shalmaneser II. (8.c. 858-823),1
Samas Rimmon IL. (B.c. 823-810),? Rimmon-nirari LIT.
(B.c. 810-783),? Tiglath Pilesar III. (Bc. 745-727),'
Sargon (B.C. 722-705), Sennacherib (B.c. 705-681),°
Esarhaddon I. (B.c. 681-668)," and Assurbanipal (B.c.
668-626)8 The attempts at permanent conquest
date from the reign of Sargon. The long reign of
Assurbanipal falls into two periods, a former of great
extension and conquest, and a latter when the tide
began to turn and the Assyrian empire, overstrained
and exhausted, showed signs of decay. Finally, in the
reign of Esarhaddon II., Nineveh fell (B.c. 606), over-
1 RPNS, iv. 38-51. 2 R, i. 11-22. > DHA, ii. 326.

4 Jd. iii. 3-5. ® RP, ix. 3-20. 6 RPNS, vi. 83-101.
7 RP, ili, 103-124. 8 Jd., ix. 39-64.
INTRODUCTION II

whelmed by a confederacy which included the Medes.
Probably no empire was ever less lamented by the
world at large, for we have the Assyrians’ own word
for it that their warfare was attended with every
circumstance of cruelty and horror. They hold indeed
a bad pre-eminence in that respect over all the other
nations of antiquity.

With the fall of Nineveh serious Semitic aggression
ceased, so far as the [ranians were concerned, till after
the Christian era had begun. Arabia was at that epoch
extremely prosperous, and carried on a vast caravan
tratiic in native produce and imports from India with
the west and north. When, however, Rome had
become recognised as the centre of the world, her
merchants soon hit upon a less circuitous and conse-
quently cheaper route. They started a direct trafic
between India and the Red Sea, whereby merchandise,
instead of being landed in Southern Arabia and thence
conveyed northwards by land, was discharged at
Arsinoe, Cleopatris (Suez), and other Egyptian ports.
As a result, Southern Arabia—the most fertile and
populous region of the peninsula—was ruined, and in
time, both there and along the lines of the old caravan-
routes, only massive remains of cities, canals, dams, and
aqueducts were left to witness to a lost prosperity. A
vast population was thrown out of employment, and the
Arabs began to emigrate northward as early, it would
seem, as the first century a.D. The Azdites in this
way founded the cities of Hira and Anbar on the
Euphrates, and were lords of Damascus till the days
of the Khalifa "Umar. Other tribes from the south
settled in the mountains of Aja and Salma, to the
north of Najd and Al Hajaz. These Northern Arabs
were divided in their allegiance between the Roman
and Sdsdnian empires; and their quarrels among
themselves, their restlessness and inconstancy, made
them thorns in the sides of both, and lcd to many
——

12 INTRODUCTION

difficulties. The defeat of Julian by Sapor IT. is said
to have been largely due to the defection of the Arab
allies of the former, while on the other hand the
western frontier of [ran was always liable to be over-
run by them as far north as and including Azarbijan.
The havoc caused was often great, and the retaliation,
on occasions, ferocious.

With the rise of Muhammad the Arabs became
a great religious and political power. After his
death in A.D. 632 he was succeeded in turn by Abt
Bakr and thmar. In the course of the ten years of the
latter’s rule [ran was conquered by his generals after
the three great battles of Kadisiyya and Jalulé in a.D.
637, and Nahavand, a.D.641. A dynasty of high officials
of the Sasanian empire still held out and maintained
the ancient faith in the fastnesses of Mazandaran,! but
Iran as a whole was both from a religious and a
political point of view submerged. The religious
conquest proved to be permanent, but after a time
national feeling began to re-assert itself against the
political, as the following brief summary of events
may serve to show. “Umar appointed a committee
of five to select the next Khalifa after his death.
After long debate they chose ’Uthman, but subsequently
repenting of their choice three of the five brought
about his assassination after a reign of twelve years,
and nominated ’Ali as Khalifa (a.D. 656). ~“Uthman
was of the Umayyad family, and its head Mu’awiya,
then governor of Syria, took up arms to avenge him.
Neither had any direct claim to the Khildfat, but
"Alf was the son of Muhammad’s uncle Abt Talib, and
had married the prophet’s daughter Fatima, known as
“the maiden.” Muhammad had said of him: “’Ali
is for me, and I am for him; he stands to me in the
same rank as Aaron did to Moses; I am the town
in which all knowledge is shut up, and he is the gate

1 NSEH, 139.
INTRODUCTION 13

of it.”1 ’Alf came to be regarded as associated in a very
special way with the prophet, and was known as his
executor or mandatary, and also as the Lion of God, or
simply as the Lion. Mu’4wiya, on the other hand, was
the son of one of Muhammad’s bitterest opponents,
and had nothing but his own abilities to recommend
him. In the heat of the contest which ensued some of
’Alj’s followers in their zeal for him went too far. They
not only claimed the Khildfat for him by divine right,
but actually denied that Abi Bakr,’ Umar, and ‘Uthman
had any title to be regarded as legitimate Khalftas at
all. This shocked and drew a good many of the
faithful into Mu’dwiya’s camp, and the two parties
became known as Shfites (partisans) and Sunnites
(orthodox). In the event an extreme Muhammadan
“sect known as Kharijites (dissenters), which arose at
that time, denied the rights of both candidates,
advocated the bestowal of the Khilafat on “the best,”
and came to the conclusion that the true course out
of the difficulty would be to remove both. ’Ali was
accordingly assassinated, but Mu’awiya escaped and
became Khaltfa without further dispute.2 The wrongs
of Ali, however, as many thought them, had taken hold
on the popular mind, especially in Irdn, and were
intensified when his son Husain—the grandson of
Muhammad himself—was slain by Mu’dwiya’s son and
successor Yizid, a.D. 681. The Umayyads, whose chief
support lay in Syria, had necessarily to rule from
Damascus, and this tended to slacken their hold over
their Eastern possessions. Taking advantage of this
fact, and exploiting the feeling about Ali to their own
advantage, the descendants of ’Abbds, one of Muham-
mad’s uncles, gradually undermined the position of
the reigning house, till at length in the year a.p. 750,
with the assistance of the Persians, they supplanted
the Umayyads everywhere except in Spain. The
1 OHS, 331. 2? NESH, 8o.

 

   
14 INTRODUCTION

triumph of the ’Abbasids was a half triumph for
Persian nationality, and the fact was recognised by the
abandonment of Damascus as the seat of empire, and a
return to the old state of things that had prevailed
under the Sdsdnians by the building of Baghdad and
the transference to it of the seat of government.
Another triumph was won when, after the death of
Hartinw’r-Rashid, his son Mamun, whose mother was
a Persian slave, overcame with Persian help his brother
Amin, who was supported by Syria. Mamun was the
last great Abbasid Khalffa(a.D. 813-833). Decline soon
followed. In a.p. 861 the Khalifa Mutawakkil was
murdered by his own son, and the ’Abbasids became
thenceforth insignificant, having little power outside
the walls of Baghdad and dependent chiefly on the
forbearance of their mayors of the palace, if the expres-
sion may be applied to Eastern history, who preferred
to veil their own supremacy behind the reverence still
inspired by the Khalifas in their religious aspect as
Commanders of the Faithful. Inthe tenth century this
office was held by the Dilamids, who claimed descent
from the ancient Persian kings and were fervent Shi'ites.
They ruled over Western and Southern Iran, posing
the while as the Khalifas’ most obedient slaves. In
the north and east the Samanides, who claimed to
be descended from the famous franian hero Bahram
Chubina, but were in reality of Turkman descent, were
supreme, The political supremacy of the Arabs in
[ran was at an end.

The Iranians and the Greeks and Romans.—The
historic strife between Persian and Greek is so familiar
to us that it is hard to realise that the only portion of
it in frénian legend that in any way coincides with
authentic history is that which deals with the invasion
of the East by Alexander the Great; and even this is
mostly based not on native but Greek tradition, so modi-
fied by [ranian patriotism as to gloss over or explain
INTRODUCTION 15

away the great overthrow of the East by the West.
A genuine native tradition dating from those times
would be extremely interesting, and it is very dis-
appointing not to have it. Nothing survives of
Alexander the Great in native franian legend except
a conviction that he was one of the great persecutors
and destroyers of Zoroastrianism. This will be referred
to later on, when we have to touch upon the preserva-
tion of [ranian tradition in general. It would seem as
if the long predominance of the Roman empire on the
stage of history had obliterated the memory of most of
the great events of earlier ages and distorted that of
the rest. We should expect, however, that at least the
Roman empire itself during its greatest period would
receive some recognition, especially an event so glorious
for the East as the overthrow of Crassus at Carrhae
(B.C. 53), but again we are disappointed. The explana-
tion seems to be that during the whole period of the rise
and greatness of Rome, [ran was under foreign domina-
tion, first Grecian. and then Parthian. At all events
it is not till a native dynasty rules again in Irdén that
we begin to find common ground in [ranian and Roman
history, and this is not till the third century of the
Christian era. Till then Rome obliterated Greece only
to be ignored itself in all but the name. Iranian tradi-
tion knows of Rum but of nothing behind it.

The Iranians and the Aryans of India.—In this
case the interest for us is chiefly a religious one.
From the date (B.c. 250) of the conversion of the
Indian king, Asoka of Magadha, to Buddhism that
faith began to extend rapidly. Asoka, like all
sincere converts, was an enthusiast, and in his reign
Buddhism was preached not only in India itself but in
Eastern Iran, and even so far west, it is said, as the
shores of the Caspian.! It prospered much and con-
tinued to hold its own in Kabulistan till a.p. 850,
1 DHA, iv, 543; Gray, ‘‘ At the Court of the Amir,” 143; HIE, 149.
16 INTRODUCTION

when a Brahman dynasty replaced the Buddhist. It
was probably not much before the eleventh century
of the Christian era that Muhammadanism finally
triumphed in those regions! To the Zoroastrian,
however, no less than to the Muhammadan, Buddhism
and Brahmanism were alike idolatry, and this view has
left, as we shall see, its mark on [ranian legend. The
flerce wars carried on against the idolaters of India by
the Muhammadans of Eastern [ran at the end of the
tenth and the beginning of the eleventh century have
also left their mark.

The Iranians and Turdnians.—Savage, barbarous,
and uncouth, the nations of the North have always
been notorious for the disgust and terror with which
they have inspired the higher civilisations of the South.
The Turanians were little better than the Assyrians 10
their treatment of vanquished foes, and decidedly worse
in aspect. In the most ancient times of which we have
any record, the great highway for these nations south-
ward lay between the Caspian and Euxine Seas. They
had therefore to cross the barrier of the Caucasus, which
is said to be only passable, save by expert Alpine
climbers, in three places, one at each end and one near
the centre. Of these the most practicable for large
bodies of men lay along the flat shores of the Caspian.
The Caucasus stops short of that sea, and only one spur
of the range running in a north-easterly direction
nearly approaches it. Between this spur and the sea,
where the passage is narrowest, stands the town of
Darband. Here, according to the legend, Sikandar, 2.e.
Alexander the Great, built a mighty barrier to restrain
the incursions of Gog and Magog, 2.e. of the Turanians.
Such a wall extending across the Pass of Darband was
actually built for that purpose by the great Sasdnian
Shéh Niushirw4n, the contemporary of the Emperor
Justinian, and those two rulers agreed to share the

1 EHI, ii 415, &c.
INTRODUCTION 17

expense of preventing barbarism from penetrating south
of the Caucasus. Two centuries later, when the Khazars,
a Turkish race from what is now Southern Russia,
captured Tiflis and wrought great havoc, the “Abbasid
Khalifa Manstr erected defensive works and secured
the whole region up to the great mountain-barrier.?
Coming down to later times, and regarding the matter
from the other side, we may mention that one of Peter
the Great’s first acts after his accession to the throne
was to make sure of Darband.

The first historical invasion by a Turanian race is
that of the Kimmerians of Homer and Herodotus, the
Gomer of the Bible and the Gimirrd of the Assyrian
inscriptions, who appear to have dwelt in early times
on the Dniester and the Sea of Azof, whence they were
driven by the pressure of kindred races whom the
Assyrians called Manda. Traversing the Pass of Dar-
band they settled for a time north of the Aras, where
undoubtedly they must have come into contact with
the Medes. Being still pressed upon from the north,
they made an unsuccessful attempt to invade Assyria
in B.c, 677, and then turned westward into Asia Minor.®

In the wake of the Kimmerian invasion came the
cause of it—-the Sacae or Scythians, who seem to have
forced the line of the Aras, to have overrun the terri-
tory of the Medes and the kingdom of Ellipi, and to
have established as their capital the famous city of
Ekbatana, the modern Hamadan, in what has always
been known in ancient history as Media Magna, It
seems to have been this domination of the Sacae at
Ekbatana that has been recorded for us in history as
the Empire of the Medes. The confusion appears to

1 GDF, v. 87-89. In RSM, 352, this arrangement is said to have
begun in the reigns of Yazdagird II. and the younger Theodosius.
The reader will find a picture of Darband (Derbent) and its wall in
KA, i. 76.

2 NSEH, 138.

3 SHO, 124.
18 INTRODUCTION

have arisen from the similarity between the Assyrian
words for Medes and nomads respectively, the former
being Mad4 and the latter Manda, coupled with the fact
that the Madd& and Manda both formed part of the
confederation which, under the leadership of Kastarit,
the Kyaxares of the Greeks, overthrew Nineveh.! The
empire of the Manda at Ekbatana—the so-called Median
Empire—continued till the middle of the sixth century
B.c. It shared the dominion over Western Asia with
Babylon and Lydia, and was no doubt the cause of the
elaborate defensive works with which Nebuchadnezzar,
mindful of the fate of Nineveh, sought to make his
capital impregnable: it held the overlordship of
_ Western Iran. In the year B.C. 550, however, Cyrus,
king of Elam, rebelled against his overlord, Istuvegu of
Ekbatana, the Astyages of the Greeks, and overthrew
him in the following year.2 Cyrus then subjugated the
Persians, entered Babylon in B.c. 544, conquered Asia
Minor and all the tableland of Iran, united its tribes for
the first time in history under one government, and
became known to Iater times as Cyrus the Great. He
is said to have extended his conquests to the Jaxartes,
on the borders of which he erected fortresses to hold
the nomad tribes in check,’ and the Greek historians,
with the exception of Xenophon, represent him as
perishing in a war with the Scythians. The legend of
Cyrus and Tomyris, the queen of the Massagetae, told
by Herodotus, is well known.* Cyrus’ second successor,
Darius Hystaspis, the false Smerdis being left out of
the question, also carried the war into the enemy's
country, and advanced beyond the Danube in B.c. 513,
though not very successfully, to avenge, as Herodotus
tells us,> the Scythian invasions which preceded the fall
of the Assyrian Kmpire.

In the century after the death of Alexander the

t SHC, 484, 520. 2 Jd. 499. ’ DHA, v. 22; vi. 103.
INTRODUCTION 19

Great the Parthians, reinforced by another Turanian
tribe known as the Dahae, rebelled against the
Seleucids (B.c. 250), and became the dominant race in
Iran, till a successful revolt (a.p. 226) placed the native
Sdsdnian dynasty on the throne. During their long
domination the Parthians in their turn suffered from
the incursions of kindred races from the North, in
much the same way as the English settlers in Britain
suffered from the Danes. The second century before
the Christian era was marked by great activity on the
part of the Turdnians, and the whole border of [ran
from the Hindu Kush to the Caspian was overrun
by them. Two Parthian monarchs in succession—
Phraates II. and Artabanus I].—were defeated and
slain, and the Parthian Empire was only saved from
overthrow by Mithridates II. Foiled by him the
Turdnians turned to the East and permanently settled
in Eastern [ran, in the region which has ever since
been called after one of their peoples, Sacaestan or
Sistan, the stead or home of the Sacae (c¢. B.C. 100).

Another Turdnian people, known as the Alans or Alani,
who first appear, it is said) in Chinese annals, were on
the Volga in the first century of the Christian era,
Pressed upon by the Huns, who had defeated them in a
great battle, they overran Media and Armenia, some of
them finding their way into the Caucasus, where their
descendants, it is said, still exist.2 Thence in a.D. 133,
at the invitation of Pharasmanes, king of Iberia, they
invaded Azarbijan and Armenia, ravaged the country,
and had to be bought off by Vologeses II., the Parthian
monarch of the time.

The Huns, who had been instrumental in precipitating
the Alani on [rdn, were themselves in flight before other
hordes. A large contingent of them seized and settled
upon the oasis of Samarkand or Sughd. Here, im-
proved by long settlement both in aspect and manners,?

1 GDF, iii. 315-316, and note. 4 Ld, 8 7d, iii, 312.
20 INTRODUCTION

they became known as the White Huns; or to the
[r4nians, who carried on many wars with them, as the
Haitalians.

Lastly, in the middle of the sixth century of the
Christian era the name of the Turks begins to appear
in history. Spreading from Mount Altai, or the Golden
Mountain, in Central Asia, they extended themselves
over the northern half of the continent, subjugating
among other nations the Haitdlians. The empire of
the Turks only lasted about two centuries,’ but the
tribes and nations of which it was composed were
spread over the north of Asia from China to the Oxus
and the Danube, and under the name of Turkmans
have proved a permanent menace to the northern
frontiers of {ran.

The Abbasids soon learned to avail themselves of the
services of Turkman chiefs in the administration of
their empire. It was thus that the Samanids first
rose to power under the Khalifa Mamun, only, as
we have seen, to make themselves independent under
his degenerate successors. About the year A.D. 96I
a disputed succession occurred among the Samanids.
The rightful heir in the direct line was a boy only
eicht years old, and for that reason, as the times were
troublous, a party among the nobles declared in favour
of his uncle, his father’s brother. The matter was
referred for settlement to the Samanid governor of
Khurdsan—a man of Turkman descent named Alptigin
—but before his decision arrived the dispute had been
settled and Mansur had succeeded to the throne.
Alptigin had given his decision in favour of the uncle,
and being fearful of Manstr’s vengeance he with-
drew from Khuras4n and carved himself out a small
principality at Ghazni. He died in a.D. 969, and after
two short reigns the troops elected Subuktigin to be
their chief. He was a Turkman, had been brought up

1 GDF, v. 175
INTRODUCTION 21

in the household of Alptigin, had subsequently acted
as his general, and was a man of great ability and
courage. He speedily enlarged his dominions and
began those raids into India which became so frequent
in the days of his more famous son. In the meantime
the Samanid ruler Manstr had died, and his son, the
Amir Nub II., was driven from his capital at Bukhara
by a Turkman invasion instigated by two of his own
nobles, who subsequently, however, were compelled to
flee for their lives. They appealed for aid to the
Dflamids—the rivals of the Samanids—and obtained
it. On this the Amir Nuh II. himself appealed for
help to Subuktigin, who marched to his assistance.
A great battle was fought at Harat, and Subuktigin
gained a decisive victory. The Amir in his grati-
tude bestowed on him the title of Nasiru’d-Din,
or Defender of the Faith, and on his eldest son
Mahmud, who had greatly distinguished himself, that
of Saifu’d-Daula, or Sword of the State, as well as
the governorship of Khurdsan. This happened in a.p.
994. Three years later Subuktigin died. He left three
sons, Mahmud, Isma’fl, and Nasr, and appointed Isma’fl
to succeed him. Mahmud seems to have behaved well,
but after vain attempts at conciliation and compromise
he was compelled to assert himself against his brother,
who was speedily overthrown and ended his days in
internment as a Sstate-prisoner. The other brother,
Nasr, supported Mahmud. Shortly afterwards the
Samanid dynasty flickered out after the death of the
Amir Nuh II., and in a.D. 999 Mahmud formally
assumed the sovereignty, an event which is duly
noted on his coins by the prefix of Amir to his own
titles, and the omission of the name of the Sa4ménid
overlord which previously had been retained by the
rulers of Ghazni. Mahmud was then twenty-eight
years old. His career as a great conqueror and
1 BHI, ii. 479.
22 INTRODUCTION

religious fanatic is well known. His domination ex-
tended from the Punjab to the Tigris, and from
Bukhar4é to the Indian Ocean. He has, however,
another claim upon our memories. His name was
to become for ever associated with that of the poet
of the Shahnama who had despaired in those troublous
times of obtaining any adequate royal patronage for
his long formed design of moulding into song the epic
history of his land and people. It was a moment of
high hopes for many, for the young and ambitious
prince, for the ambitious but no longer youthful poet,
and for all who either by birth or adoption had the
welfare of [ran at heart. The Arab yoke had been
shaken off, Persian was reviving in the literature, old
[ranian names were being resumed, and there seemed
the fairest prospects for the establishment of a third
Persian empire with Mahmud for its first Shah. It
is true that religious differences remained. Half Iran
was Shiite and the other half Sunnite,) but save for
that it seemed a stroke of fair fortune that made the
great king and the great poet contemporaries.

1 The Turkman element was strongly Sunnite. Persia did not
become thoroughly Shi’ite till the sixteenth century. NSEH, 101.
CHAPTER II
POET AND POEM

THE most trustworthy materials for the life of Firdausi
are to be found in his own personal references, there
being probably no poem of considerable length in
which the writer keeps himself so much in evidence
as Firdausi does in the Shahnama. Next in authority
to his own statements we must place the account
given of him by Nizdmi-1--Arddi of Samarkand in
bis work entitled “Chahar Makdla,” ze. ‘“ Four Dis-
courses.”* They are on Secretaries, Poets, Astrologers,
and Physicians respectively, and consist chiefly of
anecdotes. One of these, in the “ Discourse on Poets,”
gives the valuable account of Firdausi. Unfortunately
it throws doubt on the authenticity of the extant
version of one of his compositions—the Satire on Sultan
Mahmid, only a few lines of which, if Nizimi is to be
believed, can be regarded as Firdausi’s own. They
suffice, however, to indicate one good reason for the
poet’s difference with Mahmud and the general line
that he took in his literary revenge, though that Sul-
tan, it is pretty evident, never even heard that the
poet had written the Satire at all! In addition to the
above-mentioned sources of information there are two
formal biographies of the poet. One, which dates
about A.D. 1425, was compiled by order of Baisinghar
Khan, the grandson of Timur the Lame, and is prefixed
to the former’s edition of the text of the Shahndma.
It is apparently based on an older metrical life of which

1 BOM.
23
24 INTRODUCTION

it preserves some extracts, and is itself the basis of
most of the biographical notices of the poet, including
that in the Encyclopedia Britannica. The other, which
dates about a.pD. 1486, is in Daulat Shah’s “ Lives of
the Poets,” and is preferred by the writer of the article
“Ferdoucy” in the Biographie Universelle. Both are
used by Mohl in the preface to his edition of the text
and translation of the Shahnama, and both are full of
mythical details.

Let us first confine ourselves to the statements in
the poet’s undoubted writings and to legitimate deduc-
tions therefrom. He calls himself Abu ’1 Kasim, and
we gather, that he was born about a.p. 941. We
arrive at this in the following way. In the whole
Shahnama there is only one definite date—that on
which he finished the poem. This, mixing up the
Muhammadan era with the Zoroastrian calendar, he
tells us he did on the day of Ard in the month of.
Sapandarmad of the year 400 of the Hijra. This par-
ticular year, for the Muhammadan years are lunar and
vary accordingly, began on August 25th, a.D. 1009, and
ended on the 14th day of that month in the year
following. Therefore Firdausi finished the Shahnama
on February 25th, a.D. ro1o. He gives his one date
in the concluding lines of the poem, where he also
says :—

When one and seventy years had passed me by
The heavens bowed down before my poetry.}

This we may fairly interpret as meaning that he
finished his work when he was seventy-one years old,
i.e. about sixty-nine, as we reckon, since thirty-four
Muhammadan years go to about thirty-three of ours.

The poet was a Muhammadan of the Shiite sect.
This is clear from his reference to ’Ali in his Pre-
lude.”

1 C, 2095. 2 In this volume § 7.
INTRODUCTION 26

Moreover, he was not a strict Muhammadan in
the matter of wine-drinking :—

The time to quaff delicious wine is now,

For musky scents breathe from the mountzain-brow,
The air resoundeth and earth travaileth,

And blest is he whose heart drink gladdeneth,

He that hath wine and money, bread and sweets,
And can behead a sheep to make him meats.

These have not I. Who hath them well is he.

Oh! pity one that is in poverty !1

And again :—

Bring tulip-tinted wine, O Hashimi!
From jars that never need replenishing.

Why seek I who am deaf at sixty-three
The world’s grace and observance ?2

He soon after has a fit of repentance :—

Old man whose years amount to sixty-three !
Shall wine be still the burden of thy lay ?

Without a warning life may end with thee ;
Think of repentance then, seek wisdom’s way.

May God approve this slave. May he attain

In wisdom riches and in singing gain, 3

He ownéd or occupied land; at least the following
passages suggest that conclusion :—

A cloud hath risen and the moon’s obscured,
From that dark cloud a shower of milk is poured,
No river plain or upland can I spy,

The raven’s plumes are lost against the sky,

In one unceasing stream egg-apples fall :

What is high heaven’s purpose in it all ?

No fire-wood salted meat or barley-grain

Are left me, naught till harvest come again!
Amid this gloom, this day of tax and fear, ©
When earth with snow is like an ivory sphere,
All mine affairs in overthrow will end

Unless my hand is grasped by some good friend.

1 VY, 1630. 2 C, 1457. 3 Id. 1460.
4 Id., 1487. Reading last line with P.
26 INTRODUCTION
And again :—’

The hail this year like death on me hath come
Though death itself were better than the hail,
And heaven’s lofty far extending dome
Hath caused my fuel sheep and wheat to fail.}

In some verses, complaining of the advance of old age,
he alludes to a calamity that befell him when he was
fifty-eight, or it may be that an escape from drowning,
which he seems to have had about that time, had a
sobering effect upon him. This accident will be re-
ferred to in another connection later on. He says:—

Since I took up the cup of fifty-eight

The bier and grave, naught else, 1 contemplate.
Ah! for my sword-like speech when I was thirty,

Those luscious days, musk-scented, roseate ! 2

At the age of sixty-five he lost his son :-—

At sixty-five ’tis ill to catch at pelf.
Oh! let me read that lesson to myself
And muse upon the passing of my son.
My turn it was to go yet he hath gone.

Seven years and thirty o’er the youth had sped
When he distasted of the world and fled.

He hurried off alone. I stayed to see
The outcome of my labours. 3

In the year following his son’s death he speaks of
himself as being much broken :—

While three score years and five were passing by,
Like Spring-winds o’er the desert, poverty

And toil were mine; next year like one bemused
I leaned upon a staff, my hands refused

1C, 2089. 2 V, 680,
7 C, 1951.
INTRODUCTION. 47

The rein, my cheeks grew moon-like pale, my beard
Lost its black hue and camphor-like appeared,

Mine upright stature bent as age came on

And all the lustre of mine eyes was gone.!

He never speaks of himself as having any profession
or official position, but if we may hazard a conjecture it is
that he or his son or both were educated for the office of
scribe. He puts the following glorification of that pro-
fession into the mouth of Buzurjmihr, the famous chief
minister of the still more famous Shah Nishirwan : *—

Teach to thy son the business of the scribe
That he may be as life to thee and thine,
And, as thou wouldest have thy toils bear fruit,
Grudge not instructors to him, for this art
Will bring a youth before the throne and make
The undeserving fortune’s favourite.

Of all professions ’tis the most esteemed,
Exalting even those of lowly birth.

A ready scribe who is a man of rede

Is bound to sit e’en in the royal presence
And, if he be a man of diligence,

Will have uncounted treasure from the Shih,
While if endowed with fluency and style

He will be studious to improve himself,

Use his endeavours to be more concise

And put his matter more attractively.

The scribe hath need to be a man of wisdom,
Of much endurance and good memory,

A man of tact, accustomed to Court-ways,

A holy man whose tongue is mute for evil,

A man of knowledge, patience, truthfulness,
A man right trusty pious and well-favoured.
If thus endowed he cometh to the Shah

He cannot choose but sit before the throne,?

~ However this may be, from the time when he be-
came his own master he appears to have devoted him-

VV, 1274.

2 The poet also represents this Shah as being highly indignant when
a wealthy cordwainer, in return for valuable services, ventures to ask
as a favour that his son may be made ascribe. C, 1778.

3 C, 1676.
26 INTRODUCTION

self to poetry. Referring to the completion of the
Shahndma he says :—

My life from youth to eld hath run its course
In hearing other and mine own discourse.!

We have already had an allusion to his “ sword-like
speech ” when he was thirty, and we know that between
the ages of thirty-five and sixty-nine he was occupied
on the Shahnama. He tells us in a passage that will
be quoted later on that he spent thirty-five years on
that poem, ze. about thirty-four years as we reckon.
The prose materials for this, he informs us, already
had been embodied in book-form,? and the idea of
turning them into verse had suggested itself to the
poet Dakiki, a young man of brilliant parts but of
vicious habits, who was murdered by the hand of one
of his own slaves.’ Dakiki had only just begun his
great task when he was cut off, but Firdaus{ admits
his priority :—

Although he only rhymed the veriest mite—
One thousand couplets full of feast and fight—
He was my pioneer and he alone

In that he set the Shahs upon the throne.
From nobles honour and emolument

Had he ; his trouble was his own ill bent.

To sing the praises of the kings was his
And crown the princes with his eulogies.4

Dakitki seems to have died about a.D. 976, for
Firdausi took up the work and it employed him for
the next thirty-four years as we reckon. At first he
found himself hampered through lack of the necessary
materials. What those were will be explained later
on in the present chapter. He made countless in-
quiries and began to despair, fearing that lke Daktki
he should not live to complete his undertaking. He

21 C, 2096. 2 See Prelude, § 8. 3 Ja. $9. -
4 V, 1555:
INTRODUCTION 29

also suffered from lack of patronage and encouragement.
The times were troublous and men’s minds were other-
wise occupied. At length both the needful materials
and the patron were vouchsafed him. The former
were obtained for him by a friend and fellow-towns-
man.’ The latter he found somewhat later in the
person of Aba Manstr bin Muhammad, probably a
local magnate, who warmly encouraged him and
treated him with the greatest kindness and generosity.
This, we may venture to assume, was one of the
happiest epochs in the poet’s life. He was in the
first flush of a great and enduring enthusiasm; the
means of gratifying it were in his possession; he held
the field, and his material future seemed assured: his
noble, rich, and generous patron would see to that.
Alas! that patron died—murdered like Daktfkt, but by
whom and in what circuimstances we know not. The
poet was overwhelmed for a time, but he persevered
and kept in mind his patron’s counsel that the Book of
Kings (Shahnadma) when completed should be dedi-
cated to kings.” In course of time the poet found
other patrons, notably one Ahmad ibn Muhammad
of Chalandshadn, to whom in A.D. 999 he dedicated a
complete Shahnama. fFirdausi was staying with
Ahmad when he had the escape from drowning already
referred to, and he seems to have been rescued
cither by Ahmad himself or by Ahmad’s son. This
passage is not in our printed texts. The poet, how-
ever, had never forgotten the advice of his former
patron, the beloved Abu Mansur, and in this same year
his opportunity came. The last king of the Samanid
dynasty died and Mahmud became supreme in Eastern
rin. Henceforth it was to Mahmtd that the poet
looked for patronage, and he appears to have left

1 Prelude, § Io. 2 Jd, § 11.
3 NIN, 23, 24.
30

INTRODUCTION

no stone unturned to gain it. If adulation could
have achieved his end he ought to have succeeded.
The reader will find a specimen in the present

volume.}

Klsewhere in another elaborate panegyric

he says :—

God bless the Shah, the pride of crown and throne
And signet-ring, bless him whose treasuries groan
With his munificence what while the fame

Of majesty is heightened by his name.

O’er all the world one carpet hath been placed—
His token nevermore to be effaced—
And on it are a cushion and a seat
For Fazl, son of Ahmad, a man replete
With justice, prudence, rede, and godly fear;
No Shah before had such a minister.
In: his hands is the peace of all the state
For he is good and chief of all the great,
Frank-spoken, with clean hands and single heart ;
To serve God and his sovereign is his part.
With this wise upright minister for friend
My far-extending labour reached its end.

I framed this story of the days of yore,
Selected from the book of men of lore,

- That it in mine old age might yield me fruit,

a e

Give me a crown dindrs and high repute,

But saw no bounteous worldlord ; there was none
Who added to the lustre of the throne.

I waited for a patron patiently—

One whose tnunificence required no key.

When I was fifty-eight, and when in truth

I still felt young though I had lost my youth,

A proclamation reached mine ears at last

Whereat care aged and all my troubles pass’d.

It ran :—“ Ye men of name who long to find

Some trace of Faridun still left. behind !

See bright-souled Faridun alive again

With earth and time for bondslaves. He hath ta’en

 

1 Prelude, § 12.
INTRODUCTION 31

The world by justice and by largessings,

And is exalted o’er all other kings,

Bright are the records of his earlier day,

And may he flourish, root and fruit, for aye.”
Now since that proclamation reached mine ear
I wish not any other sound to hear;

In his name have I fashioned this my lay,
And may his end be universal sway.!

The reader will note that both in §12 of the
Prelude and in the passage just quoted Firdausi
couples Mahmud and his minister in eulogy. As the
Prelude is retrospective, we may venture to assume
who that minister was, because as it was written last the
reference if inopportune would not have been inserted.
There can hardly be a doubt that in both passages the
same minister is referred to—Fazl, son of Ahinad.

The passage from which the above extracts are
taken is a very important one. It seems to have
been penned a few years before the completion of the
Shahndma, for the poet was over sixty-five at the time.
The extracts suggest that he had lately received some
definite encouragement, some promise of patronage or
reward from Mahmud or his minister or both, where-
upon he wrote this panegyric and prefixed it to the
section that he had been engaged on or had taken in
hand when the announcement of Mahmiud’s accession
first reached him. Jf Mahmiud, who was of Turkman
descent, had strong racial proclivities, the section in
point hardly seems to be well chosen, for it tells of the
final overthrow of Afrasiyab, the great protagonist of
the Turkman race, at the hands of the {frdnian Shah
Kai Khusrau. Perhaps Mahmud had become more
iranian than the Iranians. Such cases are not un-
known in history. At all events we know that his
minister Fazl, son of Ahmad, or to give him his full
title Abi’l ’Abbdés Fazl bin Ahmad, had franian

LV, 1272-1274.
32 INTRODUCTION

leanings, for he changed the official language for state
documents from Arabic to Persian. After -his fall his
successor, Ahmad Hasan Maimandi, returned to the old
arrangement.’ At the time when the poet wrote the
above passage Abul “Abbas Fazl must have been at
the height of his power, say about a.D. 1006. We are
told on the authority of Al ’Utbi that he was one of
the most celebrated of book-students, and Al ‘Utbi,
who was Mahmiid’s secretary, ought to have known.”
It is very hard to resist the inference that Abit’l
‘Abbas Fazl had given the poet encouragement, and
that the latter looked to him to secure a fitting re-
ception by Mahmud of the poem when finished. The
poet’s idea seems to’ have been that the Shahndma
was to be regarded as Mahmid’s memorial, while the
profits of his great work were to be devoted to some
special object which was to be regarded as his own
memorial :—

Of all the things that earn our monarch’s praise,

The things of chiefest profit in his days,

This will best serve to keep his memory rife

And live as part and parcel of his life,

And I am hoping to live too till I

Receive his gold that when I come to die

I too may leave my monument with things
Drawn from the treasury of the king of kings.*

If the poet put his faith in Abu'l “Abbas Fazl he was
doomed to disappointment. In the meantime we have
a lamentation over hopes deferred, royal neglect which
may have been intentional or merely unwitting, and
active opposition :—

Six times ten thousand couplets there will be
| Well ordered—banishers of misery.

For thrice a thousand couplets one may look

In vain as yet in any Persian book,

And if thou cancellest each faulty strain

In sooth five hundred scarcely will remain.

1 NIN, 25, note. 2 KUR, 396. 3 V, 1730.
INTRODUCTION 33

That one—a bounteous king and of such worth
And lustre mid the monarchs of the earth—
Should disregard these histories is due

To slanderers and mine ill fortune too.

They have maligned my work, my marketing
Is spoiled through lack of favour with the king,
But when the royal warrior shall read

My pleasant histories with all good heed

I shall be gladdened by his treasures here,

And may no foeman’s ill approach him near.
My book may tlien recall me to his mind

And I the fruitage of my labours find.

Be his the crown and throne while time shall run,
And may his destiny outshine the sun. }

At another time he is plunged in despair :—

The dear delights of earth, the sovereign sway,
What boot they? Soon thy rule will pass away.
Blest is the pious mendicant and wise,

Whose ears oft feel the world’s rough pleasantries,
For when he passeth he will leave behind

A good name and a good conclusion find.

His portion is in Heaven and in God’s sight

He will have honour. Such is not my plight
Who am in wretched case, calamitous,

With all that I possess sent Hellward thus
Beyond recall! No hope in Yeaven I see,

My hand is void, both worlds have ruined me !?

In moments of disappointment, too, and at periods
probably years apart, the poet gives vent to his feelings
not only in respect to his own times but even to
Mahmtd himself. The expression of them is put. into
the mouths of some of his characters, but the prophe-
cies are of the sound type made after the event and
evidently the poet’s own handiwork :—

' A time is coming when the world will have

| A king that is devoid of understanding,
| A king whose gloomy spirit will work woe ;
The world will darken 'neath his tyranny

|
I

1 C, 1998. 2 Id. 1587.
34 INTRODUCTION

And good will ne’er be found among his treasures.
| He will be ever gathering fresh hosts
| To win his crown new fame but in the end

This monarch and his hosts will pass away,

And there will be a change of dynasty.

And again :—

' The warrior will despise the husbandman,
High birth and dignity will bear no fruit ;
Then men will rob each other, none will know
A blessing from a curse, and secret dealing
Prevail o’er open, while the hearts of men
Will turn to flint, sire will be foe to son
And son will scheme ’gainst sire; a worthless slave

- Will be the Sh4h, high birth and majesty

. Will count for nothing ; no one will be loyal.

| There will be tyranny of soul and tongue ;

| A mongrel race—Irdnian, Turkman, Arab—

| Will come to be and talk in gibberish.?

These passages, in Professor Néldeke’s opinion,
clearly refer to Mahmud and to the circumstances of
the poet’s own time. The latter occurs nearly at the
end of the poem, and is put into the mouth of the
commander of the Persian host just before the fatal
battle of Kadisiyya, a.D. 637.

At length the great work is finished, but the poet's
mood is still one of despondence :—

When five and sixty years had passed me by

I viewed my work with more anxiety,

But as my yearning to achieve it grew

My fortune’s star receded from my view.

Great men and learnéd Persians had for me
My work all copied out gratuitously

While I sat looking on, and thou hadst said
That I was toiling for my daily bread.

Naught but their praises had I for my part
And, while they praised, I had a broken heart.
The mouths of their old money-bags were tied,

1 C, 1294. 2 Id, 2064. 3 NIN, 26.
INTRODUCTION 35

Whereat mine ardent heart was mortified.

"Ali Dilam and’bu Dulaf these two

Helped me to bear mine undertaking thro’ ;
These ardent souls, my fellow townsmen, they
Were kind and sped my work in every way.
Ha’ty son of Kutib, a Persian he,

Would not take from me and withhold my fee,
But furnished gold and silver, clothes and meat ;
From him I got incitement, wings and feet.
Taxation, root and branch, I know not, I

Loll on my quilt at ease. When seventy

And one years of my life had passed me by

The heavens bowed down before my poetry.

For five and thirty years I bore much pain

Here in this Wayside Inn in hope of gain,

But all the five and thirty years thus past
Naught helped ; men gave my travail to the blast,
And my hopes too have gone for evermore

Now that mine age hath almost reached fourscore.

For ever lusty be Mahmud the king,

His heart still glad, his head still flourishing.
Him both in public and in private I

Have praised so that my words will never die.
Of praises from the great I had iny store,

The praises that I give to him are more.

For ever may he live, this prudent king,

And see his undertakings prospering.

I have bequeathed as his memorial

This book, six times ten thousand lines in all.1

There are other references by the poet to his work
and his hopes concerning it, but it is believed that the
most important passages have now been set forth. If
then we had no other sources of information than
these, what should we gather from them? That the
poet in the prime of life succeeded to the work and
mnaterials of Dakiki, and laboured at his task for many
years under various patrons but not receiving such
recognition as in his own opinion his deserts merited ;

1 C, 2095. The readings of the names of the poet’s friends are
taken from Nizémi’s quotation of this passage. BCM, 79.
36 INTRODUCTION

that he thought he saw his opportunity in the accession
of Mahmid and did his best to avail himself of it;
that he received some encouragement if not from the
Sultan himself at least from Abt’l “Abbas Fazl, the
chief minister, and achieved his task early in ap.
1010; that for some years before that date there had
been opposition to him at Court, his work vilified
and his character misrepresented ; that these intrigues
ultimately prevailed, and that he never received the
reward for his labours that a perhaps somewhat too
fervid temperament had led him to hope for or expect ;
that for years after the completion of the poem he
still hoped on, was nearly eighty when he finally
despaired, but to the last continued to praise Mahmud.

Now if we seek to look further into the causes of
Firdausi’s disappointment we have at hand a plausible
and even probable explanation, but one for which we
have, at present at all events, no direct evidence. Just
about the time when the Shahndma was completed
Mahmiud’s chief minister, Abu'l ’Abbés Fazl, fell into
disgrace. He had once been in the service of the
Samanids, but when Mahmud became governor of
Khurdsan in a.D. 994, his father, Subuktagin, applied
to the Samédnid prince, Nuh bin Mansir, for the
services of Abul ’Abbas on behalf of his son. Ac-
cordingly he became the steward of Mahmid’s house-
hold at Nishdpur, and, after Mahmud’s accession,
chief minister. He is said to have made use of his
position to enrich himself, and his administration is
stated to have been so oppressive that Khurasan was
devastated and depopulated, but this of course need
not be taken too literally. The Sultan, however,
became concerned with regard to the diminution of
the levies and the falling off in the revenue, and
remonstrated with Abtw’l ’Abbas, who threatened to
resign, In aD. 1011, after long negotiations, the
Sultan, enraged at his conduct, imposed a fine of
INTRODUCTION 37

100,000 dinars upon him, and, as he still deferred
payment, had him imprisoned and put to the torture.
His enemies availed themselves of his disgrace, and
of the Sultan’s displeasure and absence on one of his
numerous campaigns, to have the fallen minister done
to death in A.D. 1013.1

The suggestion then is that the poet lost his chance
owing to the troubles in which the minister became
involved just about the time when the Shahnama
would be ready for presentation to Mahmiud; and
when we picture to ourselves the remorseless intrigues
of an Oriental court—-intrigues sticking at no atrocity
and shrinking from no meanness—we can well imagine
that if the unfortunate minister really had taken an
interest in the poet’s work, there would not be wanting
those who would only be too willing out of mere spite
to strike at the patron through the poet.

However this may be, the latter, indignant at the
treatment he had undergone, or smarting under the
sense of unmerited neglect, set about writing a Satire
on Sultan Mahmud, of which, according to Nizimi-1-
Artdi, only the following five couplets survived in his
days. They run as follows :—

‘‘Yon prater hath grown old,” they flung at me,
“Tn love toward the Prophet and ’Ali.”

That love, if I shall speak of it, implies

Five score Mahmids for me to patronise.

The slave-girl’s brat is but a worthless thing
Although its fatler came to be a king.

Had e’er the Shah a turn for goodness shown
He would have seated me upon the throne.
Because his kindred is of mean estate

He cannot bear to hear about the great.

In the extant version of the Satire that we follow,
which consists of 102 couplets, the above couplets

1 KUR, 396. Cf. too EHI, ii. 486; iv. 148.
* C, 63.
38 INTRODUCTION

appear not in this order but separately as the 11th,
27th, 83rd, 72nd, and 76th respectively, with some
differences of reading. Here they read rather discon-
nectedly, but have an appropriate context in the
extant version of the Satire. We learn from them
that one of the charges brought against the poet was
that he was a heretic of the sect of the Shi'ites, and
this may have weighed with the orthodox Mahmud.
The poet for his part develops the old taunt of the
slave who became a Shah. If now we turn to the
extant version of the Satire, and accept it as genuine
in spite of what Nizdmi says, we get additional and
interesting information. The poet speaks of himself
as Firdausi of Tus. Tus was formerly a city of much
importance in Khurdsdan, and its ruins are still to be
seen some seventeen miles N.N.W. of Mashad. He
tells us that he spent thirty years over the Shéhnama,
that it was presented to Mahmud, who had promised
a worthy but gave him a very inadequate reward—
little more than one-seventh of what he expected—
and that he publicly gave away the whole of it toa
street sherbet-seller in payment for a drink. He also
informs us that Mahmid threatened to have -him
trampled to death by elephants, and he ends by
cursing the Sultan.

We now pass on to what Nizdmi has to tell us
more than a hundred years after the death of the
poet.

Abw’l Késim Firdausi was one of the landed pro-
prietors of Tus. He was a native of a village called
Bazh, which formed part of one of the quarters, dis-
tricts, or suburbs of the city. He was a man of
importance and of independent. means, which were
derived from the income of his land. He had: one
daughter, and the sole object of his labours on the
Shdhnima was to obtain the funds necessary to pro-
vide her with a dowry. When he had completed the
INTRODUCTION 39

work it was transcribed by Ali Dilam and recited by
Abt Dulaf. He was much in favour with Ha’fy, son
of Kutiba, the governor of the city, who treated him
with all consideration in the matter of taxation.

"Ali Dilam transcribed the Shahndma in seven
volumes, and Firdausi set off for Ghazni with Abu
Dulaf. Ahmad Hasan Maimandi, Mahmiud’s chief
minister, befriended him, and the poem was duly
presented to the Sultén, who accepted it. The
minister, however, had enemies, who pointed out that
Firdausi was a heretic, as some of the verses in his
Prelude to the Shahnama showed,’ and the result was
that the poet got much less than he expected. He
went to the bath in deep chagrin, and on coming out
divided the sum that he had received between the
bath-man and a sherbet-seller of whom he had bought
adrink. Then fearing the wrath of Mahmid he fled to
Hardt, where he lay hidden for six months. Mahmitd
sent messengers after him to Tus, but not finding him
they turned back, on which the poet ventured to go
there himself, taking the Shahnama with him.2 Thence
he journeyéd on to Tabaristan, whose ruler treated
him kindly. There Firdausi wrote his Satire on
Mahmitd, read it to the chief, and offered to dedicate
the Shaihndma to him instead of to the Sultan. The
chief of Tabaristan, however, was himself one of
Mahmiud’s vassals, and he persuaded the poet to let
the dedication stand, and bought the Satire of him
for one hundred thousand drachms—a thousand for
each couplet. He then destroyed it, and Firdausi
himself destroyed his own rough copy, only five verses
remaining extant—the five already given. We here
append our version of the Satire. Assuming that it

1 6§ 1 and 7.

2 If Mahmid was really seriously offended with Firdausi it seems

strange that the latter’s estate at Tas was not confiscated on this
occasion.
40

INTRODUCTION

is in essentials the poet’s handiwork the reader pro-
bably will agree with the prudent chief of Tabaristan

in his

opinion that the sooner it was suppressed

the better.

SATIRE ON SULTAN MAHMUD.

Ho! Shah Mahmud who hast as victor trod

The climes! if man thou fearest not fear God,
For there were many Shéhs ere thou hadst birth
Who all were crownéd monarchs of the earth
And all of them pre-eminent o’er thee

In treasure, host, throne, crown, and dignity.
They did no act that was not good and right,
Went not about to swindle and to spite,

Dealt with their subjects justly and were naught
If not God’s worshippers. They only sought
From time an honoured name and thus to gain
An honoured end ; but all good folk disdain -
Shdahs that are bound in filthy lucre’s chain.
What though the kingship of the world is thine,
Dost ask what boot these whirling words of mine?
Thou hast not seen my heart in its fierce mood,
Thou reck’st not of my sword a-drip with blood
But term’st me faithless, heretic! J am

A lion, and thou callest me a ram !

“Yon ribald hath grown old,” men flung at me,
“Tn love toward the Prophet and ’Ali.”

But is there, tell me this, one viler yet

Than he whose heart against ’Alf is set ?

These two I serve till Resurrection-morn

E’en if the Shah should have my body torn
Asunder. I will love these two kings though
The Shah’s sword be above, my head below.

I serve the Prophet’s slaves, the dust revere
Upon His mandatary’s! foot. No fear

Have I for all thy threats :—“ Thou shalt be brayed
By elephants and have thy body made

A river Nile,” for mine enlightened mind

Place for the love of these two souls shall find

1° All.
INTRODUCTION 41

Within my heart. What said the inspired Lord
Of bidding and forbidding —Heaven’s own word ?
“T am the City of the Doctrine, he
That is the gateway to it is Ali.”
I witness that His heart isin that word J
As though, as thou may’st say, His voice I heard.
If thou hast mind and wit and rede to hand
By Prophet and ’Ali take up thy stand.
If ill result to thee mine is the breach ;
Thus is it, and I practise what I preach.
Thus have I done from birth, thus will I die ; C. 64
The dust upon the Lion’s! foot am I.
What: others say can make no difference
To me; I never speak but in this sense,
And if the Shah adopt another strain
His wisdom weigheth not one barley-grain.
When God shall set the Prophet and ’Ali
On royal thrones I, if my poetry
Came from my love to them, shall in the skies
Have five-score like Mahmud to patronise.
While earth remainethi it will have its lords,
And all that wear the crown shall hear these words :—
“ Firdausi—-I of Tus— your friend, disclaim
Mahmud as patron. I wrote in the name
Of the Prophet and ’Ali; for their sake I
Have pierced so many genis of fantasy.”

So long as there was no Firdausi here
The fortune of this world of ours was sere,
Yet on this tale of mine thou wouldst not look
Misled by one who vilified my book,
But may all those that vilified my strain
Expect revolving heaven’s help in vain.

These stories of the sovereigns of old
Had I in mine own charming language told,
And when my years had almost reached fourscore
My hopes were scattered to the wind. I bore
Here in this Wayside Inn the toil so long
Because I hoped for treasure through my song ~
Of sixty thousand noble couplets spent .
On warlike topics, and their argument
The lasso, scimitar, artillery,
The battle-axe, the falchion brandished high,

1 All,
42

INTRODUCTION

The casque, the mail, the charger’s armature,
The wilderness, the ocean, stream and shore, -
Wolf, dragon, elephant, and crocodile,

Pard, lion, and ’Afrit, the cunning wile

Of Ghul, the sorcery of divs whose cries
Reached heaven, the heroes famed for enterprise
Upon the day of battle (these I sing),

The heroes combating and glorying,

Men too of no mean rank or name obscure

But such as Salm Afrdsiy4b and Tur,

Shah Faridin and Kai Kubad and fell

Zahhak the tyrant and the infidel,

Garshasp and Sam whom Nariman the bold
Begot—world-paladins of mighty mould—
Hushang and Talmuras the Div that bound,
With Mintchihr,. Jamshid that Shah renowned,
Kaus and Kai Khusrau with crown upon

His head, and Rustam, and that famous one

Of brazen form,! Gudarz and his delight—

His eighty sons, those Lions of the fight

And horsemen of the plain—great Shah Lubrasp,
Zavir the captain of the host, Gushtasp,

Jamdasp who shone among the host on high
More brightly than the sun doth in the sky,
Dara son of Dara4b, Bahman, the great
Sikandar—chief of all that ruled the state—
Withal too Shah Ardshir, Shapur his son,
Bahram and Nushirwan the virtuous one.

Such is the famous and exalted throng

_ That I have made the subject of my song,

All dead for ages but my poetry
Hath caused their names to live again, for I
Have raised these dead, as Jesus did, and made

| Their names live, one and all, and I have laid

A servitude upon myself for thee,

O king! to keep thy name in memory.

The homes that are the dwellings of to-day
Will sink ’neath shower and sunshine to decay,
But storm and rain shall never mar what I
Have built—the palace of my poetry.

This story shall be read by every one
Possessed of wisdom while the ages run ;

1 Asfandiyar.
INTRODUCTION 43

But that was not thy promised recompense,

Nor did I hope reward in such a sense.

A slanderer (my curse upon his head !)

Extracted evil out of what I said

For good, destroyed iny credit with the king

. And made my glowing coal a frigid thing.

' If-thou hadst been a judge of honest ways,

' And hadst bestowed a thought upon my lays,
Thou wouldst have said that I have paid my dues—
The talent that was given me to use—

In full. My words have made the world to grow

; Like Paradise. Before me none could sow
The seed of words. Unnumbered folk no doubt
Flung them in countless multitudes about,

But, though they were so many, up to now

No one hath ever mentioned them, I trow.

For thirty years exceeding toil I bore

And made the Persians live in Persian lore.
Unless the worldlord had close-fisted grown

I should have had a seat upon the throne ;

He would have placed me there, but common sense
Hath never been the monarch’s excellence.
Had he himself been royal by descent

He would have heeded royal precedent,

For, had his sire been Shah, he would ere now
Have set a crown of gold upon my brow,

Or had his mother been a lady I |

Had stood in gold and silver coin knee-high ;
But since his kindred are of mean estate

He cannot bear to hear about tlie great.

The bounty of this Sh4h of high degree

Hath altered nine times nine to four times three ! !
The travail of this Book of Kings I bore

For thirty years that from his treasury’s store
The Shah might recompense me, set me free
From worldly needs and give me higli degree
Among my peers. He oped his treasury’s door
And gave a sherbet-seller’s 7 fee, not more,

1 Mohl, who has a slightly different text, translates ‘‘ rien et moins que
rien,” which he admits to be pure conjecture. To us it seems a reference
to the amount expected and the amount received: by the poet.

2 In the original a ‘‘ fakka’’-seller. ‘* Fakka” seems to have been
barley-water flavoured with raisins, or else some sort of beer. Cf. the
Greek gotcxa (Latin posca, sour wine).
C. 66

44

INTRODUCTION

On whom I spent it in the public way—
A fit recipient of such royal pay !
A king devoid of honour, sense of right,
And faith as this is, is not worth a mite.
The slave-girl’s brat is but a worthless thing
Although it may be fathered by a king.
To raise the vile that good from them may flow
Is but to lose our thread’s end when we sew
Or put a viper in our pouch to grow.
If thou shalt plant a tree of nauseous fruit
In Paradise itself and drench the root,
When moisture is required, frum Heaven’s own rill
Of purest honey, the old nature still
Will show itself at last; thou wilt procure
Fruit no less nauseous than the fruit before.
If by perfumers’ stalls thy steps are bent
Thy clothing will catch somewhat of the scent,
And if thou visitest a charcoal Jack
Thou wilt get naught from him that is not black.
That miscreants should do ill is no strange case ;
Hope nothing then from one whose birth is base,
For none can furbish off the gloom of night,
And washing will not make an Etiiop white.
To look for good from an ill stock to rise
Is but to throw the dust in one’s own eyes.
The worldlord, if an honoured name he bore,
Would have esteemed right dear this branch of lore
And listened to such various tales as these
Of ancient ways and royal usages,
Would not have met my wishes with disdain
Or let the labour of my life be vain.

I have a purpose in these lofty rhymes—
The Shah perchance will be advised betimes,
Will recognise what words are, will pay heed
To this his hoary old adviser’s rede,
Do to no other poets wrong henceforth
But hold his reputation something worth,
For men will quote till Re<urrection-morn
The injured poet’s recompense of scorn.

A suppliant at the Court of God most high
I shall throw dust upon my head and ery :—
‘Lord, cause Thy faithful servant’s heart to dwell
In light, and burn this ‘miscreant’s soul in Hell.”
INTRODUCTION 45

Before resuming our summary of Nizami’s account
we should mention that later on the indomitable poet
wrote his second great poem, “ Yusuf and Zulikha.”
This work is still extant in MS., and a printed edition
is understood to be in preparation. He tells us in his
Introduction that he wrote it at the suggestion of
a high official of the Dilamids with a view of dedi-
cating it to the ruling Dilamid prince. The poet
seems to have quitted Tabaristan, where a prolonged
stay might have been not without risk both to himself
and to his friendly entertainer, and to have journeyed
further to the west, where beyond the reach of
Mahmud’s wrath (if Mahmid really concerned hin-
self about the matter at all) he wrote the above-
mentioned work.’ Ultimately he returned to his
native city of Tus, and we may conclude this account
of the calamity of an author by summarising the rest
of what Nizimi has to tell us. He no doubt gives us,
as he professes to do, the received tradition of the
time. Sultén Mahmud, induced by the representa-
tions of his chief minister (Hasan Maimandi?) ulti-
mately repented of his treatment of the poet. He
accordingly gave directions that sixty thousand dinars’
worth of indigo should be carried to Firdausi at Tus
with a suitable apology. This was done and the
indigo arrived safely, but as the caravan that bore
it entered by one gate the poet's corpse was being
borne out to burial by another, outside which was a
garden belonging to him, and there he was interred,
because in the orthodox view of a local preacher he
was a heretic, and therefore must not be suffered to
lie in the Musulmin Cemetery. He left a daughter
—a high-spirited lady—who refused to accept the
Sultén’s gift, and the money was therefore spent in
repairing the hostelry of Chaha, on the road between
Marv and Nishapur. The poet seems to have died

1 NIN, 27.
46 INTRODUCTION

A.D. 1020-1021, at the age of about eighty. Nizdmi
visited his tomb, a.D. [1 16-1117.

It has not seemed. necessary to the present writer
to enter more fully into the interesting subject of the
poet's biography. The reader will find ampler details
in Professor Noldeke’s invaluable “ Iranische National-
epos,” and in Professor Browne’s most useful translation
of Nizdimi, both of which works are obtainable in a
convenient form. It is not worth while to reproduce
here the accounts of later biographers—those men-
tioned at the beginning of the present chapter—and
of other writers. Some of their anecdotes will, how-
ever, be inserted in appropriate places in-the course
of this translation. A word of warning should be
added. The present writer has confined himself,
except where otherwise stated, to the figures given,
as to the poet's age, &c., in the two texts from which
our translation of the Shahnama has been made.
They seem to be generally consistent, but other MSS.
give other figures, and if their readings are adopted
other conclusions naturally follow.

The present writer, as far as he 1s concerned, would
gladly terminate the history of the writing and re-
ception of the Shahndma at the point where the poet
himself left it in concluding that work; at all events
pains has been taken to distinguish Firdaus?’ S OWN ac-
count from that given by others.’ It only remains to
add that late in life when writing “ Yusuf and Zulikha”
he affected to condemn his greatest achievement as
a pack of idle tales. Old age, disappointment, and
other circumstances may well have contributed to
warp his judgment, but we cannot doubt that in his
heart of hearts he was as conscious of what con-
stituted his best title to fame as when he penned the
concluding words of the Shahndima :—

I shall live on, the seed of words have I
Flung broad-cast, and henceforth I shall not die.
INTRODUCTION 47

: The Shdhndma of Firdausi is one of the great x
‘epic poems of the world. The author has left on
record that it originally consisted of sixty thousand le
couplets. All existing MSS., however, even when \a
eked out by obvious interpolations, fall short of that
number by several thousand. [Part has therefore been
lost or else the poet spoke i in round numbers. At all
events enough remains, and to all appearance pretty
much as he wrote it. The authorship, so far as the
present writer is aware, has never been disputed.

The poem is in rhymed couplets, and its metre—
the typical heroic metre of the language in which it is
written—may thus be indicated :—

Such a line as

The Pharaohs of Egypt, the Czesars of Rome,

represents the metre of the original.

The poet wrote in almost pure Persian. The ad-
mixture of Arabic is slight, and in all probability
would be slighter if we had the Shahnama precisely
as Firdausi left it. Some Arabic the poet was bound
to use—terms, for instance, in connection with his
religion—but. copyists, it seéms probable, are respon-
sible for most of the rest.

The poet’s theme is the story of his fatherland and
folk, from the Creation to the Muhammadan conquest,
set forth in the form of a metrical chronicle.’ His
subject-matter he derived from many sources, mythical,
religious, historical, and popular—a classification which
. of course involves many cross-divisions.

His method, as might be expected, differs widely from
Homer’s. The contrast is in fact striking. Homer
effectually hides his own personality. He plunges into
the middle of his subject, and makes the period of
his action as brief as possible. Selecting one central
48 INTRODUCTION

motive he weaves round it only so much of the
subject-matter at his disposal as he can employ with
tolerable consistency. His web is closely woven, and
the workmanship so exquisite that comparatively few
indications are left to betray the nature of the raw
material.

Firdausi, on the other hand, takes us into his con-
fidence from the first. In direct violation of the
Horatian precept he begins from Leda’s egg and
earlier, and the period of his action extends over
thousands of years. He uses all the epic material,
good, bad, and indifferent, on which he can lay hands.
His web 1s open-work and its design unsymmetrical.
He makes no secret of his method, but tells us what
his materials are and how he obtained them. He
shows us in fact his loom in action, and ealls our
attention to the bright, many-coloured threads of
myth, romance, and history which are being woven
therein.

It will be readily understood that the method of
the Eastern poet leads to inconsistencies and difficulties,
chronological and otherwise, for which the reader
should be prepared. He will find, for instance, in the
mythical portions of the poem at least, the chief
heroes living on through successive ages; described
as old and yet fighting with all the vigour of early
maanhood; dropping out of sight and apparently
forgotten only to reappear in their pristine vigour
later on. The explanation is twofold. In the first
place several of the characters of the poem were
originally divine or semi-divine beings, and though
introduced to us as human have in some cases not
wholly lost their superhuman attributes. And in the
second place the popular mythology was not, and was
not designed to be, consistent. It told legends of the
same hero, assigning them to different reigns, ages,
and localities. A Western poet would have taken
INTRODUCTION 49

them all and forced as much as suited him into the
mould of a brief action; the Eastern poet takes them
at full length, and inserts them where he finds them,
wholly regardless of the fact that by so doing he
extends life far beyond the span of mortals.

The poem is divided into reigns. Of these there
are forty-nine, and they with one dynasty, which is
reckoned as a single reign, make up the fifty heads

under which the subject-matter of the poem is dis-

posed. The reigns are those of the mythic or historic
Shahs or kings of Persia, who are divided into four
dynasties: [. The Pishdadian, of ten Shahs, and lasting
2441 years. II. The Kaidnian, of ten Shahs, and last-
ing 732 years. III. The Ashkdnian, which is reckoned
as one reign, lasting 200 years. IV. The Sdsdnian, of
twenty-nine Shdhs, and lasting 501 years. The space
of time covered is therefore 3874 years.

The poem may also be divided into two periods-—
a mythic and a historic. This distinction is based not
so much on the nature of the subject-matter as on the
names of the chief characters. At a certain point in
the poem the names cease to be mythic and become
historic. The Mythic Period extends from the be-
ginning of the narrative down to the reigns of the last
two Shahs of the Kaidanian dynasty. These and the
remainder of the poem form the Historic Period. The
Shahs in question are Dard, son of Darab, better known
as Darius Codomanus, and Sikandar—<Alexander. the
Great.

The chief characters of the poem are :—

I. The personified powers of good and evil. The
religion of the ancient Persians, from which they became
converted to Muhammadanism, was that known as Fire-~
worship, Dualism, or Zoroastrianism. These may be
taken to represent roughly three aspects of its growth
and development. It was called Fire-worship from its
chief visible object of adoration—a very ancient cult ;

D
50 INTRODUCTION

Dualism from its chief tenet—the belief that the
universe owed its existing form to the opposing
creations and ceaseless conflicts of two supernatural
beings, a good and an evil, Urmuzd and Ahriman ;' and
Zoroastrianism from its legendary prophet, who may
be taken to typify its priestly or ceremonial element.
Urmuzd and Ahriman pervade the whole poem, and
all that happens for good or ill is attributed either
directly or indirectly to the one or the other. They
are assumed to be constantly engaged in strife with
each other, and especially on the battlefield of the
world, where the struggle is carried on chiefly by means
of the forces, principalities, and powers which they
have called into being, or whose actions they inspire.
If the poet had confined himself to the use of the
names Urmuzd and Ahriman this antagonism would
have been much more marked. He was probably
placed, however, in a very difficult position, not only as
a Muhammadan himself but also as a poet eager for
recognition at the hands of a fanatically Muhammadan
Sultan. The result is a compromise. He seldom
uses the word Urmuzd, but in its place such terms
as Maker of the world, World-lord, the All-mighty,
the righteous Judge or simply God, but hardly ever
the Muhammadan Allah. On the other hand he
employs the expression Ahriman with great frequency,
often substituting for it, however, the word Div, which
may be rendered Fiend, and occasionally the name of
the Muhammadan evil principle Iblis. Practically his
conception of the good principle is Muhammadan in
all but the name, while his evil principle is no longer
the formidable Zoroastrian Ahriman, but approximates

1 There is a tendency among modern Zoroastrians and some scholars
to modify or even deny the dualism, but to do this is to deprive Zoro-
astrianism of its most characteristic feature, and its best title to be
considered one of the great religions of the world. See DFKHP, ii.
187; HEP, 303-305.
INTRODUCTION SI

rather to the Muhammadan Iblis, or to the Devil of
the Bible. This being premised, however, it is pro-
posed to retain the expressions Urmuzd and Abriman
in the Introduction, as being on the whole the most
suitable and convenient, and of course in the poem
itself wherever they occur.

II. The Shahs and other kings or heroes. These,
so far as they are historical, may be left to speak for
themselves, but those that are mythical need a word
of explanation. The dualistic conception of the
universe, while it tended to exalt Urmuzd and Ahbriman,
did so at the expense of the other deities of the ancient
nature-worship who gradually became grouped in in-
ferior capacities, according to the popular conceptions
of them, round one or other of the two great principles,
the beneficent round Urmuzd and the maleficent
round Ahriman. In the course of time many of them
came to be regarded as ancient earthly rulers and
heroes, and as such they are represented in the poem,
the good for the most part as [ranian and the
evil as those of other races. All the chief mythical
characters were once themselves gods or demigods, or
were credited with such ancestors in tradition.

Direct supernatural agency is, however, infrequent
in the Shihnama. On one side we have Urmuzd, who
sometimes intervenes by his messenger and agent the
angel Surish, and on the other Ahriman, who acts by
means of his instruments the divs, or his adherents
the warlocks and witches. We have instances of white
magic as wellas of black. The fabulous Simurgh too—
a bird somewhat resembling the roc of the “ Arabian
Nights,” but endowed with wisdom and articulate speech
—plays an important part. Dreams, especially those in
which the dead appear, are regarded as veridical, and
the evil eye is much dreaded. Presentiments are held
to be authentic, and use is made of amiulets, elixirs,
and divining-cups. The most potent agent throughout
52 INTRODUCTION

is destiny, which is represented as God’s purpose with
respect to man as revealed in the heavens by the
aspects of the stars and planets. There is no more
impressive picture in the poem than that which the
poet gives us of the remorseless process of the sky,
whose revolutions gradually grind down the strongest,
and fill the vulgar with amaze at what they term the
turns of fortune. To the sage and reader of the stars,
however, the future is spread out like a book, and
the astrologer, with his planispheres, astrolabes, calcula-
tions of nativities, and predictions generally, plays a
considerable part in the poem. Destiny, as repre-
sented to us by the poet, is made up of two distinct
elements which he does not attempt to reconcile—the
Mubhammadan and the Zoroastrian. The former may
be summed up for the reader in two texts from the
Bible :—“I am the Lord, and there is none else. I
form the light, and create darkness; I make peace,
and create evil; I am the Lord, that doeth all these
things;”! and “Shall we receive good at the hand of
God, and shall we not receive evil?” 2

The Zoroastrian conception is entirely different.
Urmuzd and Ahriman are as distinct as light from
darkness, and a hard and fast line is drawn between
good and evil, whether physical or moral. Light,
immortality, health, and all that is good in the worlds
of mind and matter proceed from Urmuzd; darkness,
death, disease, and all that is evil from Ahriman.
Urmuzd created man and fashioned the twelve houses
of the heavens that they might pour down their
kindly influence upon him; Ahriman broke into the
creation of Urmuzd and created the planets to run
counter to the stars and cross their purposes. Destiny,
therefore, from this point of view, being the resultant
of two opposing forces, is an extremely logical deduc-
tion well borne out by the events of history and the

1 Isaiah xlv. 7, 2 Job ii. Io.
‘INTRODUCTION 63

incidents of life to an Eastern eye, but corresponds
rather to what we should call fortune than to absolute
fate. The Zoroastrian view, which is that of the poet's
authorities, predominates over the Muhammadan, which ,
is that of his religion. The practical result is that in
the poem the sky is looked upon as the ultima
arbiter of human affairs, and often as acting wantonly
and capriciously with the ruthlessness of a celestial
Juggernaut. Yet the poet and his characters never
fail to appeal to destiny proper on occasions when it
suits them so to do, he to justify the ways of God to
man, and they to make excuse for evil done or the
doing of it. “It was so decreed,” pleads the evil-
doer; “And so was the penalty,” replies the avenger.
At other times again the poet seems to hold that all is
hopeless confusion, and that we cannot tell head from
tail or top from bottom.

The leading motive of the Shahnama, so far as it
can be said to have one, is Ahriman’s envy of man
—the creation of Urmuzd. The first attempt of the
evil principle to destroy mankind once for all, in the
person of their great progenitor, having failed, his next
is to seduce them from their allegiance to their Creator,
and in this he is largely successful; race becomes
opposed to race, the faithful followers of Urmuzd are
persecuted by the perverts of Ahriman, and recurring
acts of provocation or revenge form a series of
subsidiary motives which serve to keep alive the
ancient feud. These are most prominent in the
earlier portion of the Mythic period, towards the end of
which a new motive is introduced by the advent of
the great prophet of Urmuzd—dZarduhsht or Zoroaster.
Side by side with this outward visible struggle there
is the inward invisible one going on in the mind of
the individual. This is more insisted on in the
Historic period where the moral aspects of the struggle
are discoursed on at large, and the deadly sins are
54 INTRQDUCTION

personified in accordance to Zoroastrian theology as
divs or fiends in the service of Ahriman, who strive to
get the mastery over the soul of man.

The historical relations of the [ranians with other
Indo-European peoples, with the Semites and with
the Turanians,as sketched brieflyin the previous chapter,
are indicated in the poem by the mythical legends of
Zabhak and of the three sons of Faridin and their
descendants. Zahhak represents the idolatrous element
in the poem, and therefore the Semites in particular,
who were the most idolatrous race with whom the
Iranians came into contact. The Assyrians were
notoriously idolatrous, and so were the Arabs up to
the days of Muhammad. In the poem all idol-
worshippers, whether of Semitic race or not, are
regarded as descendants of Zahhik. The eldest son
of Faridin—Salm—represents the western division
of the Indo-European race, the second son Tur the
Turdnian, and the youngest son Iraj the Western
Aryan or Irdnian. The legendary accounts in the
poem of Zahhak’s conquest of Iran, of his overthrow
by Faridun, of the partition of the world by the latter
between his three sons, of the murder of Iraj by his
two elder brothers, and of the great feud which thus
originated, really set forth the historical relations of
three of the great races of mankind as seen, from the
point of view of the descendants of Iraj, through the
haze of myth and legend. As to the comparative
importance of these relations to the Irdnians, native
tradition has no hesitation in assigning the first place
to the representatives of Tir, the second to those of
Zahhak, and the third to those of Salm; and accord-
ingly in the poem the struggles of the frdnians with
the Tuirdnians occupy more space than those with all
other races combined. Yet the bitterest feud is with
Zabhdk. In other cases it is a family quarrel, but
Zahhak is of another stock—a man forbid. However,
INTRODUCTION 55

all the greatest heroes of the poem spring from unions
between members of races thus antagonistic. The
three sons of Faridun marry the daughters of an Arab
king, and their supposed descendants are therefore of
mixed race. Rustam is from Zahhdék upon his
mother’s side. Siydwush and Kai Khusrau both have
Tirénian mothers. Asfandiydr and Sikandar have
Ruiman mothers.’

We have also to note that, according to Iranian
tradition, Urmuzd did not leave himself altogether
without witness even in the lands and peoples most
given over to Ahriman. In the case of the Arabs we
have the dynasty of Al Munzir, which is always repre-
sented as being friendly to the Iranians. This dynasty
ruled at Hira. In the case of the Hindus we have
the dynasty of Kaid, which is always kindly and help-
ful. In the case of the Turdnians the tendency to
goodwill is very marked in some of the characters.
One of Afrasiyab’s own brothers becomes an arrant
traitor in his zeal for the Iranian interest, and suffers
for it at the hand of his justly indignant sovereign.
The most striking instance, however, is that of the
great and good Pirdn, Afrasiyab’s cousin, counsellor, and
commander-in-chief. Though his loyalty to his own
master is absolutely stainless and unimpeached, he
always shows himself most friendly and generous to
the Irdnians, striving for peace and for a better under-
standing between the two races. He lives to see his
honest endeavours foiled and his well-meant counsels
turn out ill, but his honesty is so transparent and
recognised that even the fierce tyrant whom he serves,

1 History and legend alike throw considerable doubt on the paternity
of Alexander the Great (Sikandar). f{rdénian patriotism avails itself of
this fact to explain that Philip married his daughter to Shah Dardb,
that Ddrdb took a dislike to her and sent her back to her father, at
whose court she gave birth to Alexander, who was brought up as Philip’s
own son. irdénian amour propre is thus saved, as the great conqueror
is made out to be an Irdnian himself—the eldest born of Shdh Dérdb.
56 INTRODUCTION

and who suffers most for having followed his advice, has
hardly a word to say against him, and he only gives up
the leadership of the host with death. It is a well paid
compliment by the poet to the Turkmanrace. It was
no doubt his own contribution toward a good under-
standing, and happily he could not foresee the horrors
which the eleventh and subsequent centuries held in
store for Iran at the hands of the nations of the North.

For the preservation of the subject-matter of the
Shahnama we are chiefly indebted to two of the
classes into which Firdaus{ tells us ancient Irdnian
society was divided—the priestly class and the agri-
cultural class—in other words the Magi and the
Dihkans. The Magi were the priests of the true
Medes or Mada, among whom they formed a caste or
tribe. Originally fire-priests, as their own name for
themselves—Athravans, literally “ fire-men ”—shows,*
they became closely associated with, even if they did
not originate, the Dualism and Zoroastrianism of
later times. Antiquity, which liberally credited them
with all the attributes of ancient priesthood, knew
them as the Magi—the great or mighty,’ and later
ages aro indebted to them for the potent words
“magic” and “magician.” In their historical seat
in Atropatene, or in the modern form of the word
Azarbjjin (which has been variously explained to mean
the land of the seed, of the descent of, or that guards
the fire), and still more in their legendary home in
Karabagh, they dwelt in the neighbourhood of scenes
of natural marvel. Earthquakes are frequent there,
mud-volcanoes, hot springs, and naphtha wells abound.
Flames issuing from clefts in the rocks have been
ablaze from time immemorial, and in autumn the ex-
halations from the soil form a phosphorescence that at
night wraps whole districts in sheets of harmless flame.
Even in parts of the Caspian the vapours bubble up,

1 DZA, i. li, 1st ed. ? Skeat, Etym. Dict., s.v.
INTRODUCTION 57

may be ignited and will go on burning, over several
square yards of water till a gust of wind extinguishes
them. The scene from all accounts is at times suffi-
ciently impressive even to the modern eye, and we
can easily imagine what fire in its purest form and
highest expression—clear, smokeless, lambent flames,
burning on unfed apparently and _ self-sustaining
century after century—imust have been to the un-
rationalistic gaze of primitive antiquity. In the
presence of those flames all other fires must have
seemed but “broken lights.” Elsewhere they were
hard to kindle, needed constant care, and were
dimmed by smoke and vapours, but here they burned
as in the Burning Bush. It was no wonder that the
place came to be looked upon as “ Holy Ground,” and
that a Cult of Fire grew up there in the dim and
distant past. We can well imagine too how famous
the priesthood of such a Cult would become amid
such surroundings. The priest of ancient times was
the man of letters, the sage, the leech, the astro-
loger and the man of occult lore and grammarye,
and this priesthood dwelt in a region which is not
even now robbed of all its ancient glamour by the
fact that it is the scene of the greatest petroleum
industry in the world. Here Prometheus stole the
fire from heaven and paid the penalty in some
Caucasian gorge. Along it from north to south
lay a great highway of the nations, across it from
east to west ran one of the great trade routes, and
the riches of India were borne from K4bul to Balkh,
from Balkh down the Oxus to the Caspian,’ and thence
through the land of Medea and of the Golden Fleece
to the Euxine and the west. It 1s of course impossible
to affirm that so widespread a cult as Fire-worship
had its origin in one particular locality, but we shall

1 The Oxus in ancient times flowed into the Caspian instead of into
the Aral Sea as at present.
58 INTRODUCTION

be safe in stating that here was a most important
centre of it, and in claiming for its priests a pro-
portionate status and sanctity." We have already
seen that Iran is a land of sharp contrasts of physical
good and evil. There the kindly reticences and con-
cealments of nature, the blue haze of distance and
the melting of line into line, are absent, there is no
neutral territory, no common meeting-ground; all is
clear, sharp, well defined and recognisable beyond the
possibility of mistake and at a glance as good or evil.
In the regions south of the Caucasus these contrasts
are accentuated, and there, it would seem, grew up
Dualism suggested and justified by its surroundings.
The doctrines of the Magi, which it is beyond
our scope to enter into except incidentally and by
way of illustration, appear in early times to have
been restricted, if not to the Magi themselves, at all
events to the Medes whose priests they were. It was
not until nearly the end of the sixth century before
the Christian era and after the suicide of Cambyses,
the son of Cyrus the Great, that the Magi first became
supreme in the vast empire which the latter had
founded, for now we have evidence that neither he
nor his son was the enthusiastic proselytiser of Zoro-
astrianism, that they were both formerly supposed to
be, but at most tolerated it along with the other
faiths of their world-wide empire.” After the death
of Cambyses, however, the Magi rose to power in the
person of the Magus Gaumata—the false Smerdis of
the Greeks—who seized the vacant throne and began,
as we learn from the inscriptions of Darius Hystaspis,
his slayer and successor, to overthrow the temples of
1 For an account of the natural phenomena of these regions see KA,
iL. 44, and Marvin, “‘ The Region of the Eternal Fire,” ch. xi., where many
interesting passages are collected. The phenomena are most striking
to the north of Karabagh at Baku, the peninsula of Apsheron and the

island of Sviatoi (Holy Island) lying off it.
2 SHC, 497.
INTRODUCTION 59

the gods in his iconoclast zeal." As Darius further |
informs us that he restored these temples, and also
at the same time describes himself as a worshipper
of Urmuzd,” we may assume that it was in the course
of his reign that Zoroastrianism became the state-
religion of the Persian empire. He also appears about /
B.c. 505 to have adopted the Zoroastrian calendar in
the place of the old Persian one that he had used up
till then, and this fact goes to support the assumption
made above.* The Magophonia or slaughter of the
Magi mentioned by Herodotus,* which has sometimes
been adduced as a proof that they could not have
been supreme in Persia so early as the times of Darius
Hystaspis,” is not really opposed to this view. It is
pretty evident that the Magophonia was not aimed
against the Magi in general, but was merely an annual
celebration of the overthrow of one particular Magus—
the impostor and usurper Gaumata—and his personal
followers.” Whether the Magi, in spite of the high
position they had gained, ever succeeded in making their
doctrines popular with the masses of the first Persian
empire may well be doubted. One at least of the
successors of Darius—Artaxerxes II. (B.c. 404-361)—
seems to have relapsed into something very like idol-
atry,’ and with the conquest of Persia by Alexander
the Great the power of the Magi waned for a time.

Rightly or wrongly Zoroastrian tradition couples -~ —

Alexander with Zahhdk and Afrdsiyab as one of the
three arch enemies of the faith.® With the intro-

1 RP, vii. 89-02. 2 Id. 3 WPT, v. xliv.
4 Herod. iii. 79. 5 RSM, 636, note.
6 DHA, v. 194. 7 DZA, ii. 53.

8 Id, i. xlviii, This notion seems to have been firmly fixed in the
minds of the faithful. We are told that in the year a.D. 1511 Zoroas- |
trians resident in Persia wrote to co-religionists in India a letter in |
which they stated ‘‘that never since the rule of Kaiomars had they
suffered more than what they were then undergoing. In sooth, they
declared that they were more oppressed than their race had ever been
at the hands of the tyrants Zohak, Afrasiab, Tur and Alexander.”
DFKHP, i. 56.
60 INTRODUCTION

duction of Greek ideas, Greek science and Greek
polytheism, there can be no doubt that the bulk of
the population relapsed into idolatry, if indeed it
had ever emerged. During the next five centuries
the Magi must have had much ado to keep alive the
doctrines, ritual, and sacred traditions of their faith.
The seductions of Greek civilisation were followed by
the brutalities of Parthian barbarism, and any modifi-
cation of these was, during the first centuries at all
events of Parthian rule, in the direction of Greek
culture. The Parthian monarchs describe themselves
as philhellenic on their coins. The Magi, however,
were well equipped for the struggle. They had a
great reputation. They held a faith in many respects
much in advance of their times, and one too that
found its justification in the strange natural pheno-
mena and sharp contrasts of physical good and evil
that characterise Iran. They had kept alive too, at
a time when ancient Persian was passing into rapid
phonetic decay, the ancient language of their race—
the Median—with its inflections and archaisms, as
will appear later on. Lastly, they were a priesthood
practising the peculiar custom of Khvaituk-das, or
next of kin marriage, which, though “most repugnant
to the sentiments of mankind at large, must certainly
have tended to preserve their faith from the dangerous
external and foreign influences which an indiscrimi-
nate practice of marriage would have entailed. That
the Magi practised Khvaituk-das in the days of the
Parthian monarchy we may learn from Catullus.’
The three principal seats of the Magi seem to have
been at Shiz, Rai, and Balkh. Shiz, the Persian Gazn,
1 Nascatur Magus ex Gelli matrisque nefando
conjugio, et discat Persicum haruspicium.
Nam Magus ex matre et gnato gignatur oportet,
si vera est Persarum impia relligio.

Carmen, |xxxix., ed. C. H. Weise.
For Khvaitiék-das see WPT, ii. 389. Cf. GHP, i. 89.
INTRODUCTION 61

is to be looked for at Takht-i-Sulaiman near the
southern frontier of Azarbijan. It contained the
famous fire-temple of Azarakhsh, which appears to be
a contraction of Azar-i-Zarduhsht, or the fire of
Zarduhsht, who is supposed to have instituted it. To
this temple it was the custom of the Shahs of Persia
in pre-Muhammadan times to make pilgrimages
afoot. Rai, which was near Tihrdn, seems to have
been the centre of a priestly principality of great
_antiquity, whose priest - prmce was known as_ the
Zarduhsht. It was finally destroyed by the Muham-
madans.” Balkh was the scene of Zarduhsht or
Zoroaster's most successful missionary effort, which
led to the conversion of Shah Gushtdsp._ Here, too,
the prophet is said to have been slain when the city
was taken by the Turanian king Arjasp. Internal
evidence seems to show that Firdausi used traditions
emanating from each of the above centres in the
Shahnama.

Of the early literature of the Magi we can only
assume that the theogonies or sacred hymns which
they chanted in the days of Herodotus* were such
as we find in their extant scriptures, just as we find
the peculiar rites and ceremonies, which he describes
as being practised by them,* still in operation at a
much later date. The tradition with regard to the
literature is as follows: The original scriptures were
revealed to Zoroaster by Urmuzd. Zoroaster preached
them to Shah Gushtdsp, whose capital was at Balkh.
Gushtasp ordered the original to be deposited in the
treasury of Shapigdn and copies to be nade and dis-
seminated, one of which was laid up in the fortress
of documents. When “the evil destined villain
Alexander” invaded Iran the copy in the fortress
of documents was burnt; that in the treasury of

1 DZA, i. xlix, rst ed, 2 Td. xlviii.
3 Herod. i. 132. 4 Id, 140.
62 INTRODUCTION
=

Shapigan fell into Alexander’s hands and was trans-
lated by his command into Greek.’ King Valkash
ordered a collection to be made of the scriptures,
which in his days existed in'Ifrdn in a scattered state
owing to the disruption caused by the Macedonian
conquest.” Ardshir, the son of Papak, who overthrew
the Parthians and restored the Iranian monarchy, also
made a collection of the scriptures. He employed
for that purpose the high-priest Tausar, who repro-
duced a similitude of the original as it had existed
in the treasury of Shapigdn.® Shdpur, the son of
Ardshir, made a collection of writings of a non-re-
ligious character dealing with medicine, astronomy,
and other scientific subjects that had been scattered
among the Hindus and Riutans, and ordered them to
be incorporated with what had already been brought
together, which was done.* Shapir, the son of
Hurmuzd, instituted a tribunal for the determination
of all points of disputed doctrine. These points
were settled by ordeal, and thenceforth the Shah
proclaimed and insisted on uniformity.’

With regard to this account legend places the birth-
place and home of Zoroaster in [rdn-vej.6 Here on
the Mountain of the Holy Questions he met Urmuzd
face to face, and received from him in a series of dia-
logues the tenets of the faith, Here too the prophet
was assailed by the demon Buiti sent by Ahriman, and
subsequently tempted by the latter in person. Both
were, however, worsted, and Zoroaster began his mission-
ary career.’ His great success seems to have been at
Balkh, one of the chief centres of Aryan civilisation.
This we may interpret as meaning that Zoroastrianism
spread from West to East along the line of the great
trade-route. The extant portions of the Zoroastrian

1.WPT, iv. xxxi. 2 Id. 413. 3 Td. xxxi.

4 Id. 414, 5 Id. 6 DZA, i. 3, notes,
7 WPT, i. 141.
INTRODUCTION 63

scriptures have many allusions to Balkh and Kastern
Irfn generally, and in the later part of the Mythic
period of the poem the scene is shifted thither.
With regard to Alexander the Great the legend is
that he burnt these scriptures, which were written
on twelve thousand _ox-hides. at Persepolis. During
the domination of the Parthians Iran was broken up
into a number of small tributary principalities under
native chiefs, some of whom seem to have main-
tained a Magian priesthood and sacred fires of their
own.”

It is possible that it may have been the rise of
local Zoroastrian cults with divergent doctrines and
ritual that led King Valkash, in his capacity of over-
lord, to make a collection of the scriptures with a
view to the establishment of a canon and uniformity.
Valkash himself has been well identified with the
Parthian king Vologeses I. (a.D. 50-78), whose
brother Tiridates is known to have been a Magus.
A letter written by Tausar to explain and justify his

. . —aOOC~—™ ° *
proceedings in regard to the reform of the faith is
still in existence.* Ardshir, the son of Papak, who
employed him, was fhe first Shah (A.D. 226-240) of
the Sdsdnian dynasty and was himself a Magus.°
The legendary destruction of the original scriptures
was of course the excuse for adding to the canon in
the reign of Shapur I. (4.D. 240-271) by restoring
to their proper place the translations made under
Alexander. With Shaptr II. (4.p. 309-379) about
A.D. 330 the canon was traditionally closed,® but
as a matter of fact there was some amount of
addition and revision as late as Chosroes I. (aD.
531-5709), after the disturbance to the faith caused
by Mazdak.’

The language of the scriptures is commonly but

1 DZ.”., i. xiii. 2 Td. xliv. 3 Id. xxxix.
4 Jd, xii. 5 Jd. 8 Jd. xlvii. 7 WPT, iv. xlii.
64 INTRODUCTION

incorrectly known as Zend. It seems almost certain
that really it should be known as Median.’ Zend,
i.c. Median, as preserved in its scriptures, and ancient
Persian, as preserved in the inscriptions of the
Achaemenids, are two sister-languages collaterally re-
~ Tated to Sanscrit. How and when Zend became ex-
tinct, whether it still survives in a modified form in
some modern dialect such as the Kiird, does not seem to
have been yet determined; but the existence of the
Zandavasta indicates that it remained known to and
used by the Magi in its inflectional form long after
its sister-language the Persian had lost most of its
inflections and had become greatly simplified. Zend
may thus be regarded as being during the five cen-
turies and a half which elapsed between the death
of Darius Codomanus and the accession of Ardshir
Papakdn the sacred language of the Magi—one known
only to themselves and holding with them very much
the same position as Sanscrit did among the Brahmans
of India. During this period ancient Persian was
itself being converted into middle Persian or Pahlavi.’
Pahlavi, it should be explained, is the same word as
Parthian, and in this connection means not the lan-
guage spoken by the Parthians themselves, but that
used under their rule by their Persian or Iranian

1 « La comparison,” says the late Professor Darmesteter in the work
in which he seems to have expressed his clearest views on the subject,
‘‘des textes avestéens avec ce que les anciens nous disent des croyances
et des pratiques des Mages prouve que l|’Avesta nous présente la croy-
ance des Mages du temps d’Hérodote, d’Aristote, de Théopompe ;
d’autre part, les anciens sont unanimes & entendre par Mages les
prétres de la Médie. I] suit de li, par le témoignage externe des
classiques joint au temoignage intrinséque des livres zends et de la
tradition native, que l’Avesta est l’cauvre des Mages, que le zend est la
langue de la Médie ancienne, et que l’on aurait le droit de remplacer
le nom impropre de langue zende par le terme de langue médique-”’
DEI, i. 12.*

2 WPT, i. xi.

* The italics are Professor Darmesteter's.
INTRODUCTION 65

subjects." To the people at large in Sdsdnian times
the language in which the inscriptions of Darius
Hystaspis and his successors had been written,
and that of the Zoroastrian scriptures compiled by
Tausar and others, were alike unintelligible. It ac-
cordingly became the custom in making copies to
append a Pahlavi version, paraphrase, or comment on
the original text. The scriptures themselves were
known as the Avasta, and all comments thereon,
whether in the original language or in Pahlavi, were
known as the Zend or Zand. The chief Zand was
of course the Pahlavi version of the Avasta, and the
two combined became known as the Avasta and Zand,
or more commonly as the Zandavasta.? Like the
Bible it preserved in a literary form all that survived
in the traditions of a race, and these were grouped
round and told in connection with a line or lines of
demigods or heroes, whose names show that they
were originally those of the beneficent and maleficent
impersonations of the ancient nature-worship of the
Aryan people, before it broke up into its Indian and
Iranian divisions. The names referred to are common
in a somewhat altered form both to the Zandavasta
and to the ancient Sanscrit hymns of India—the
Vedas.” We may regard the traditions of the Zan-
davasta as essentially Magian; they were destined,
however, to undergo a remarkable development and
expansion in other hands.

The triumph of Zoroastrianism, the translation of
the Zandavasta into Pahlavi, ze. into the vernacular,
and the consequent diffusion of the traditions of the
Magi throughout Iran occurred at an epoch when five
and a half centuries of alien rule (B.c. 331-A.D. 226)

1 WPT,i. xii. Persians of all times seem always to have known their
own language as Parsi. DEI, i. 38.

2 DZA, i. xxxi, note 2.

3 See for instance DHA, v. chapters 5 and Io.
66 INTRODUCTION

had obliterated all but the vaguest reminiscences of
the first Persian empire and the house of Achaemenes.
The consequence was that the mythical demigods of
the Zandavasta came to be regarded in Sdsdnian times
as the historic Shahs of the frdnian race. ‘These and
———what was recorded of them in the Zandavasta formed
a convenient epic framework whereon to hang legends
of Assyrian oppression, Arab raids, Turdnian invasions,
wars with the West, the deeds of national or local
heroes, and all the miscellaneous products of popular
tradition and imagination. The development of the
legends of the Zandavasta accordingly went on apace,
and the chief agents in the process were the Dihkans.
This was the name given to the rural landowners of
Irén. Firdaus{ himself seems to have been the son
of a Dihkdén. All the world over the rural popula-
tions are the depositories of national tradition. A
notable instance occurred only so long ago as the last
century when Dr. Elias Lénnrot, after years of wander-
ing among the remotest districts of Finland, dwelling
with the peasantry and taking down from their lips
all that they knew of their popular songs, ultimately
succeeded in collecting nearly twenty-three thousand
verses which, arranged by him and divided into fifty
runes, now form the national Finnish epic known as
the Kalewala.. Much the same process went on in
[rdén at an earlier date. Traditions based on the Zanda-
vasta were recited in the halls of the chiefs, at village
festivals and at street-corners—a custom still obtaining
in Persia—till in time the word Dihkdan came to have
a well recognised secondary meaning—that of pro-
fessional story-teller, rustic bard, or wandering minstrel.
In the course of the Sasdnian dynasty these traditions
were collected and put into writing. The result was
variously known as the Bastdn, Khudai, and Shah
Nama, with the respective meanings of History of

1 Ency. Brit, ix. 219.
INTRODUCTION 67

the Past, of the Lords, and of the Kings. In
Baisinghar Khan’s Preface already referred to there
is an account of the Bastan-ndma which may thus
be summarised. Shah Nushirwan collected the tradi-
tions and deposited the MSS. in his_ library.
Yazdagird, the last of the Sdsanians, employed the
Dihkan Ddnishwar to catalogue and supplement these
histories and arrange them in chronological order from
the reign of Gaiimart to that of Khusrau Parwiz.
At the time of the Muhammadan conquest of Persia
they were sent to Umar, the commander of the faith-
ful, who had them translated and only partially
approved of their contents. In the general division
of the Persian spoil the books fell into the hands of
the Abyssinians, who presented them to King Jasha,
who had them translated and highly commended
them. They became well known in his dominions
and in Hind, whence they were brought by Ya'kub
Lais, who commanded Abi Manstr, son of Abdu’r-
Razzik, to transcribe into Persian what Danishwar
the Dihkan had told in Pahlavi, and complete the
history from the time of Khusrau Parwiz to the end
of the reign of Yazdagird. Abi Mansur instructed
an officer of his father’s, Su’id, son of Manstr Alma-
‘Mari, in conjunction with four others—T4j, son of
Khburdsani of Hardt, Yazdindad, son of Shapur of
Sistan, Méhwi, son of Khurshid of Nishdpir, and
Shaddin, son of Barzin' of Tis—to undertake. the
task. When the house of the Sdmianids came into
power they took the greatest interest in the work
thus translated, and entrusted it to the poet Dakiki
to put into verse. When he had written one or two
thousand couplets he was murdered by his slave, and
thus the matter remained till the days of Mahmud,
who encouraged Firdausi to complete the work.

1C has Sulaiman son of Narin—a mistake or misprint. Cf.
NT, xxv.
68 INTRODUCTION

As Baisinghar Khan’s preface dates from the first
quarter of the fifteenth century, and contains much
that is obviously romantic, it is needful to receive the
above account with all caution. Even when we have
rejected the story of King Jasha and the Abyssinians
we are still confronted by a chronological impossi-
bility. Yakub, the son of Lais the coppersmith, died
in aD. 878. Abi Manstr, who had the work of
the Dihkan Danishwar translated, was a brother of
Muhammad, son of Abdu’r-Razzak, and this Muham-
mad was prince of Tus in the middle of the tenth
century, in the days when Firdausi was growing
up. Yakib and Abti Mansur were therefore not
contemporaries. Yaktb had worked in his father’s
shop as a youth, he then became a robber-chief,
and finally fought his way to what was practically
the lordship of Iran. As a native of. Sistan, the
home of a race whose warlike proclivities were
symbolised in the legendary exploits and character
of the national hero of Iran, Rustam, or as the founder
of a new dynasty, for political reasons he may have
taken an interest in the old traditions; but he could
not have commissioned Abi Mansur to do the work
for him, and it will be safer to dismiss the notion
that he interested himself in the compilation of the
Dihkan Danishwar as highly problematical. On the
other hand, the statement in Baisinghar Khan's pre-
face that Abi Mansur did have a Shahnama compiled
is confirmed by the learned Abi Raihdn Muhammad bin
"Ahmad Albirini (4.D. 973-1048) in his “ Chronology
of Ancient Nations.”” Again we may be somewhat
sceptical as to whether a Dihkan named Danishwar
ever existed, but we may concede that the ancient
traditions were collected and edited by some learned
(d4nishwar) Dihkdén and indeed by many such.

1 NT, xxiv.
2 Eng. trans, by Dr. E. Sachau, 119.
INTRODUCTION 69

The names of the five men employed by Abi
Mansur are all Persian, and the men themselves were
in all probability Magi, for none but they would be
likely to know Pahlavi in the tenth century. One of
the five, Shadan son of Barzin, is mentioned by Fir-
dausi as his authority for the story of the introduction
into Persia of Bidpai’s Fables in the reign of Nushir-
win.’ Dakiki, the poet who was first entrusted with
the task of versifying the Shahnama, was a. fire-
worshipper, as four lines of his bear witness :—

“ Of all of this world’s good and ill
Four things Dakiki chooseth still—
Girl’s ruby lips, the sound of lyre,
The blood-red wine, the Faith of Fire.”

Firdaust tells us in his Prelude, § 10, that when on
Dakiki’s murder he determined to carry on the work
himself he had great difficulty in obtaining the needful
materials for the purpose, and was for a while non-
plussed by want of them. His statement seems to
require some explanation, for, in addition to the con-
siderable Pahlavi literature then extant, the collections
made by learned Dihkans had been translated into
Arabic, and were obtainable in numerous histories in
that language. Albirini tells us that the poet Abi-
"Ali Muhammad bin ‘Ahmad Albalkhi in Ais Shahndma
refers to the authors of five such separate histories as
his authorities.” If, however, we accept Ndéldeke’s
view that Firdausi, in spite of his apparent assertions
to the contrary, knew no Pahlavi, was as good as
ignorant of Arabic, and used only authorities written
in the Persian of his own day,® we can understand his
difficulty about his materials. He could make no
progress till he had obtained a copy of Abi Mansir’s
Shahnama, perhaps the identical copy used by Dakfki.
The poet in fact seems to speak of his Pahlavi

1 C, 1746. 2 Eng. trans., p. 108. 3 NT, xxiii.

a7
70 INTRODUCTION

authorities as we might speak of the Hebrew Scriptures,
Ineaning the Old Testament, though we may know
them only in the English version. His chief authority
was doubtless the Shahnama of Abi Mansur, which as

we have seen had been translated into modern Persian
directly from Pahlavi originals. He also used, as it

‘would seem, translations into modern Persian of

Arabic histories themselves translated from Pahlav{
originals. Certain passages in the Shahnama, where
Iblis is substituted for Ahriman as the name of the
evil principle, may be attributed with confidence to
such secondary authorities. Pahlavi: originals’ and
Arabic versions have alike disappeared, and the Shah-
nama of Firdausi, which alone survives of all the many
Shihnamas that once existed, has now become the
principal storehouse of franian legend, and the leading
authority on the subject. The Shahnama of Firdausi
then is a true epic, not a great poet’s invention, and
the proof is to be found in the nature of his .subject-
matter and in his own words. He expressly disclaims
all originality, telling us that the tale had all been told
before, and that all the fruit that had fallen in the
garden of knowledge had been already garnered. His
share was to mould into song the epos of his native
land, scorning no tale, however lowly, and putting the
best and purest interpretation on all that he found.’

1 With a few exceptions which will come up for notice in due course.

* The Zandavasta as we possess it is a Bible inruins. Of the twenty-
one Nasks or Books of which it is said to have consisted only two are
extant in their entirety, and these two are precisely those which the
Magi would know best—the law of ceremonial observances, and the
hymns and litanies most frequently used in public worship. In addi-
tion we have fragments of most of the others, and certain summaries,
paraphrases, and comments on them in Pahlavi which enable us to
form a fair notion of the general contents of the Zandavasta as a
whole. Thus the Dinkard or ‘‘ Acts of the Faith” contains a summary
of nineteen of the twenty-one Nasks, while the Bundahish or “ Original
Creation” preserves for us the account of the creation as it was told
in the lost Démddd Nask or '‘ Creatures produced.”
INTRODUCTION 7

- The cosmogony of the poem assumes the earth to
be flat and to be supported on the_horns of a bull _
which stood on the back of a fish which swam in the
great ocean.’ The earth was environed by the gigantic
Alburz Mountains which reached to heaven.” The
range was pierced by 180 apertures in the Hast, and
180 in the West. Through these the sun made its
daily entrance and exit, travelling round the outside
during the night from the West back to the East.’
The apertures were intended to account for the changes
of place in the rising and the setting of the sun
throughout the year. The earth was divided into
Seven Climes, the central being Iran, which was sur-
rounded by the other six and was as large as all
the rest put together. It was divided from them
by vast mountain ranges.* The Central Clime was
also surrounded by the Eastern equivalent of the
Homeric Oceanus or Ocean-stream, for the Indus,
Oxus, Aras, Euxine, Bosphorus, Sea of Marmora,
Dardanelles, Nile, and Indian Ocean were regarded
as a chain of rivers, lakes, gulfs, and seas all in
connection with each other.’ This confusion, especi-
ally as regards the Oxus and the Aras, frequently
seems to have misled the poet himself. He was a
native of Eastern Irdn, and naturally supposed that
the river so constantly referred to in the poem as
the boundary between Irian and Turan was the Oxus.
He shaped matters accordingly, but it can hardly be
doubted that the river of his authorities was the
Aras.© The substitution of Aras for Oxus throws a
flood of light upon the wars, campaigns, and political
relations recorded in the Shahnama, especially during
the first and longest portion of the Mythic Period.

1 Of. Lane, “Arabian Nights,” i. 19, note 2, and Nicholas, ‘‘ Le
Quatrains de Kheyam,” 168, and note.

2 WPT, i. 35. 3 Id. 22. 4 Id. 32-33

5 WPT, i. 77, and notes. § DZA, i. 43 WPT, i. 80.
72 INTRODUCTION

The position of the Medes on the Aras explains
how the incursions into Azarbijan of the Assyrians
in early, and of the Arabs in later, times came to be
embodied in the story, how we come to have the
wars with the Turdnians brought so prominently
before us, why the arch-enemy Afrdsiyab is recorded
to have been taken prisoner in lake Urumiah, and
why the writer of the Armenian history who passes
under the name of Moses of Chorene couples the two
great enemies of the Medes in his account of Persian
fable :—“ Quid autem tibi sunt voluptati viles ac vanae
de Byraspe Astyage fabulae?”* Byrasp or Biwarasp
is the Pahlavi term for Zahhak. Astyages was the
great Turanian king of Ekbatana and sometime over-
Jord of Cyrus. The vast spaces and regions of the
Oxus have always been a difficulty to the student of
the Shahnama, but substitute the comparatively narrow
area between the Caspian and the Euxine and much
is explained.’

Thus far Firdaust follows the old Iranian cosmogony.
In the case of the heavens he rejects it; and its four
heavens of the Stars, of the Moon, of the Sun, and of
the Endless Lights, become nine in the poem—those
of the seven planets, of the angels, and of the throne
of God. These heavens were supposed to be crystal-
line spheres with independent motions and fitting one
inside another like Chinese boxes. The seven planets
are the Sun, Moon, Mercury, Mars, Venus, Jupiter, and
Saturn.

Firdausi took his imagery chiefly from the ancient
cosmogony, or from the natural features of his native
land. A Shah’s dominion extends from the Moon to
the Fish, or all the Seven Climes obey him. Armies
stretch from mountain to mountain, or from sea to sea.
The warriors’ heads touch the Sun or Saturn. The

1 Mosis Chorenensis, ed. Whiston, 77.
2 DZA, i, Introd. 1.
INTRODUCTION 73

warriors themselves are, or are like, mountains, lions,
elephants, leopards, and crocodiles, they level the hills
with their battle-cries, and pierce with their spears
the hearts of flints. Their palaces and castles bar the
eagle’s flight, rise above the clouds or hold converse
with the stars. Troops throng like locusts and ants,
and even gnats can find no room to pass them. In
battle the field or even the whole world is a sea or
stream of gore. <A tiger bestrides an elephant and
brandishes a crocodile, which being interpreted means
that a cavalier waves his sword. Swords too are, or
are like, diamonds; while spears turn the earth to a
reed-bed. One horse isso keen of sight that it can see
an ant’s foot on black cloth at night two leagues away.
Rapid motion is compared to fire or to its spirit
Azargashasp, who is often an equivalent for the
lightning, to wind, smoke, or dust, the last being the
commonest figure in the poem. The reader, like the
poet, will find it ubiquitous, and will not fail to notice in
the accounts of marches, battlefields, and single combats,
&c., that the sky, sun, moon, &c., are said to grow like
indigo or ebony, or to become veiled or to turn dark
at noonday, &c. The allusion is to the dust. To say
that the air darkened is often merely another way of
saying that the dust rose; and both, and kindred ex-
- pressions, are in constant use to indicate that hosts
or individuals have set forth on some expedition,
are approaching or engaging in battle, &e. Opposed
to the dust—the enemy, is water—the friend. “ Where
land and water are my treasure is, says one of the
Shahs in the poem, and the poet compares the joy
of having one’s work approved by the wise to that of
seeing plenty of water in one’s own canal. Conse-
quently it is not the blue but the cloudy sky that
delights the Persian eye, and spring, with its clouds
and thunder-showers, flowers, and verdure, is_ the
favourite season. “The hand of Mahmid,” says the
74 INTRODUCTION

poet, “is like a cloud in spring.” Perpetual spring
is the Persian’s notion of a perfect climate. A king
adorns his rose-garden like spring, ic. he summons
all his great men about him and _ holds a court.
The Persian year began with the spring, and the
beginning of the New Year was a season of rejoicing.
The cheek in joy or health is like the rose, tulip,
pomegranate, or Judas-tree blossoms, in fear or passion
like those of jasmine or fenugreek, or as colourless
as sandarach, the transparent gum of the Callitris
Quadrivalvis, of which pounce is made. In passion,
too, or fear, the body shakes like a willow-tree, the
heart and liver become full of blood, the veins throb
and the blood itself boils. The narcissus bedews the
rose when beauty weeps. Stature is like the cypress,
which is also the tree of the burial-ground, the tree
of posthumous fame, or like the teak. In old age
the straight-stemmed cypress stoops. A youth of
promise is a sapling bearing its first fruits. To
take any important step is to plant a tree it may
be of revenge or of some prudent act of policy,
and the fruit of the tree will according to circum-
stances turn out to be either gems or colocynth. The
poet is fond of moralising on life, its transient nature
and vicissitudes. His favourite figure for the former is
the wayside caravanserai or inn where as pilgrims or
travellers we sojourn for a brief space, and then
departing yield our room to others; for the latter he
appeals to the configuration of his native land—the
apparently endless alternation of ascent and descent
with which all who have sojourned in those parts are
well acquainted—or by a bolder flight describes- how
a man is raised to Saturn or the Pleiades only to be
flung into the ditch or to the Fish—the mythological
one referred to above. | |

Like other poets Firdausf suffered from the con-
straint of rhyme. When for instance we find “ Balkh”
INTRODUCTION 75

at the end of one hemistich of a couplet, “talkh” is
pretty certain to be at the end of the other, and as
“talkh” means “ bitter’ the sense of such passages is
apt to be strained. Similarly the changes are rung with
great frequency on the words“ nil ” (indigo or the Nile),
“mil” (a mile), and “pil” (an elephant) as verse-
endings. The first of these three words is one of the
translator's “thorns in the flesh,” the poet using it in
so many different connections that it is impossible to
find a formula of explanation that will cover thein all.
Relief from an English point of view is sometimes ob-
tained by substituting, with Mohl, “ blue sea” for “ River
Nile,’ but the best antidote, as Firdausi would say, for
the bane of the word is Butler's couplet :—

“For rhyme the rudder is of verses,
With which, like ships, they steer their courses.”

In other words, the poet uses “nfl” for the sound more
often than for the sense, and translator and reader
alike must take the consequence; but they are at all
events exonerated from seeking in such passages for
some recondite meaning which Firdausi himself never
intended to convey.
CHAPTER III
TEXT AND TRANSLATION

Up to the beginning of last century the Shdéhnama
existed in MS. only. Since then five more or less
complete editions have appeared in print :—

i. In 1808 Dr Lumsden undertook to superintend
an edition of the poem, one volume of which was
published at Caleutta in 1811, but the publication
went no further. This edition will be referred to
as L. |

u. In 1829 Turner Macan, who must always
hold the place of honour among the editors of the
poem, after devoted labour in collation of MSS.,
published at Calcutta in four volumes the first and
only complete edition, the earlier portion of the text
being based on that of L. This edition will be referred
to as C.

ii. In 1838 Jules Mohl published the first volume
of his most sumptuous edition at the expense of the
French government, Six volumes have appeared ;
but the work was never finished owing to the death of
the editor. This edition is based on an independent
collation of MSS., and includes a French prose transla-
tion as well as the Persian text." This edition will be
referred to as P.

iv. In 1850 a complete lithographed edition in one
volume folio, edited by Muhammad Mahdi, a native of

1 It should be added that the French translation has been completed
by M. Barbier de Meynard from the text of C, and the whole transla-
tion has been published separately by the late Madame Mobl.

76
INTRODUCTION 77

Ispahan, was published at Tihran. The text is a re-
print of that of C, with occasional variations,-some of
which are of value. This edition will be referred to
as T.

v. In 1877 J. A. Vullers published the first volume
of his edition, and two other volumes have since
appeared. The publication of the third volume
was interrupted by the lamented death of the editor,
but has since been completed from the materials
left by him by Samuel Lindauer. Even thus the
edition contains only about the first half of the entire
poem. This edition is based on the collation of the
texts of C and P, with occasional readings from L
and T, and other sources. This edition will be referred
to as V.

The only complete European translations of the
Shahnama hitherto published are the French one
above mentioned and an Italian one in verse by
Signor Pizzi. Translations and summaries of portions
of the poem have appeared in English and German.
The indulgence both of the Persian scholar and of
the English reader is asked on behalf of this the first
English translation of the poem as a whole in view
of the magnitude and difficulty of the undertaking.
Our prime object has been to produce a clear and
intelligible rendering, and with this end in view we
have found it needful to dispense with certain re-
dundances in the original. All these probably may be
grouped under the following heads—variant, corrupt,
and spurious passages; repetitions, tautologies, and
platitudes; and idiomatic and grammatical construc-
tions that proved intractable. Those who are ac-
quainted with the original will readily understand
what these omissions amount to; those unacquainted
with it may easily find out by comparing our version
with that of M. Moh]. Both will, we think, admit
that we have left the fable absolutely intact, that
78 INTRODUCTION

we have scrupulously avoided cutting to the quick
and have done nothing to forfeit our claim to call
this the first complete English translation of the
Shahnama.

Our version is metrical, partly rhymed and partly
unrhymed. The rhymed portion consists of preludes,
apologues, sayings of wise men, songs, terminal coup-
lets, passages in which the poet speaks in his own
person, and some others that seemed to lend them-
selves to such treatment. These form a very small
part of the whole, and are generally line for line with
the original, though couplets or hemistichs may be
sometimes inverted for convenience in rendering. We
have changed the metre occasionally partly for the
sake of variety, partly to suit the character of different
passages, and partly for our own refreshment and
amusement. The reader should, however, clearly
understand that a change of metres implies no cor-
responding change in the original, of which the metre
is the saine throughout.

The unrhymed portion, which forms the bulk of
the translation, and does not aspire to the dignity of
being called blank verse, 1s more condensed than the
rhymed, though the proportion of English to Persian
is constantly varying; sometimes a whole couplet in
the original is best expressed by a single line in the
translation; sometimes a line and a half, two lines or
more in the translation go to the couplet in the
original, The average may be roughly stated as three
English lines to two Persian couplets. The result of
these various economies is that our translation 1s some
twenty-five per cent. shorter than otherwise it would
have been.

We have followed the text of V as far as it goes,
silently incorporating with it all the changes and
additions made by the editor himself in his notes
and in his Apparatus Criticus at the end of his first
INTRODUCTION "6

volume, subject of course to the heads of omissions
stated above and to the occasional adoption of read-
ings from other texts. These, we hope, we have in-
variably noted.

When the text of V failed us we fell back upon
that of C, as to which we reserve any remarks that
we may find it necessary to make till the volume of
our translation is reached in which the change of text
occurs.

The attention of the reader is called to the follow-
ing points :—

1. It is hoped that the Introduction may prove
sufficient for those who wish to read the Shahnama
in its English dress but have no previous acquaintance
with the subject. They will find notes prefixed to
the principal divisions of the poem, but it has been
thought desirable to avoid footnotes, as far as possible,
to the translation itself.

2. The passages that need the most constant eluci-
dation are those of a descriptive, figurative, or meta-
phorical character. An attempt has been made to
explain the principal of these once for all in the
previous chapter. Such passages often might have
been made self-explanatory by a sufficient sacrifice of
the imagery of the original. It has seemed to us,
however, better to say that the Shah dropped the ball
into the cup’ or bestowed the kettledrums upon
some one, than that the Shah gave the signal for the
host to move or appointed some one commander-in-
chief.

3. The structure of the Persian language is very
loose grammatically. One form, for instance, stands
for he, she, and it. For the sake of clearness we have
often substituted the noun for the pronoun. Of

1 The cup was attached to the side of the elephant on which the
Shah or commander-in-chief rode. Both cup and ball were made of
what we should call bell-metal.
80 INTRODUCTION

course this involves a certain amount of interpreta-
tion, and differences of opinion in some cases legiti-
mately may exist as to who or what the person or
thing referred to may be. On the other hand, we
often find a noun where in English we should use a
pronoun, and we have constantly made the substitu-
tion in passages where no doubt can arise in the
reader's mind. Again the couplet-form in which the
poem is written has a tendency to break it up into
a succession of short sentences, and this, added to the
above-mentioned use of the noun where we should
naturally use the pronoun and to the paucity of con-
necting particles, frequently makes the transition from
sentence to sentence somewhat abrupt and the line
of thought difficult to follow. Often we have carried
on sentences by the addition of connecting particles
which are not in the original.

4. We desire to make some explanations with
regard to certain important words in the original.

Béj and Zamzam. By these terms is known a
certain practice of Zoroastrians which may be para-
phrased in English as “taking prayer inwardly.”
Before eating, washing, &c., it is customary to mutter
the beginning of some sacred formula, to carry through
the operation in complete silence, and then to utter
the rest of the formula aloud.” We have employed
such expressions as “ muttering ” or “ muttered prayer ”
to describe the practice. It is sometimes used as
a pretext for obtaining a few moments private con-
versation. .

Barsam. This was formerly a bundle of twigs, but
now of metal wires varying in number according to
circumstances, held in the hand during the perform-
ance of certain religious rites of the Zoroastrians.”
The practice is clearly referred to in Ezekiel viii. 16,
17. We translate “ Barsam” by “the sacred twigs.”

1 WPT, ii. 134. 2 HEP, 397, &c.
INTRODUCTION 81

Dakhma. Firdausi does not use this word in its
proper sense—that in which it is still used by the
Parsis at the present day——but in that of mausoleum,
charnel, or charnel-house, and we have so translated it.’

Dihkan.. The general sense of this word is that of
countryman as distinguished from townsman. Owing,
however, to the fact that the rural class in Irdn as
elsewhere were the chief repositories of the traditions
and folklore of their native land, which were handed
down orally and recited at local gatherings by those
best qualified for the task, the word came to have the
secondary meaning of bard or minstrel, and we have
rendered it according to its first or secondary meaning
as the sense of the passage required.

Dindr and Diram. Of these the dindr was a gold
and the diram a silver coin. The Attic drachma was
made the basis of his monetary system by Alexander
the Great, and Persia possessed no native gold coinage
till more than five centuries later. It then obtained
one by accident. By the terms of peace between
Ardawan (Artabanus), the last Parthian monarch, and
the Emperor Macrinus, after the great battle of Nisibis
in A.D. 217, the latter agreed to pay to the former
an indemnity of more than a million and a half of
our money. The sum seems to have been chiefly
paid in aurei. Consequently when Ardshir Papakan
(Artaxerxes) became the first Shah of the new native
Persian (Sdsdnian) dynasty in A.D. 226 he found the
country flooded with two distinct coinages with no
recognised relation between them except the rough
and ready one of commerce. He seems to have
left matters to settle themselves, and in his own
coinage followed the type of the aureus for his gold
coins and that of the drachma for his silver.” The

1 A full account of the Dakhma in the proper sense of the word will
be found in DFKHP, 1. 192-213.
2 RSM, 69.
82 INTRODUCTION

expression “dindrs and dirams” is one frequently
met with in the poem, and as it is rather an in-
convenient one metrically we have substituted the
older form “drachm” for “diram.”

Div. We retain this word as in the original.
When spelt with a capital it is to be regarded as equiva-
lent to Ahriman or Iblis, except in the collocations
“Black Div” and “White Div.” When spelt with
a small letter it may mean either a demon or a
member of some savage or outlandish tribe.’

Farr. The “farr” was regarded as the special
divine endowment of the [rdnian race—the favoured
people of Urmuzd—and as an object of envy or ambi-
tion to the neighbouring peoples. It was regarded in
the Zandavasta as something material, that could be
sought, seized, and carried off, and even in the Shahnama
we find a few occasions when it assumes a visible
form. Each of the three primitive castes into which
thé Iranians were divided had its own special “ farr,”
while the Shah united all three in his own person, and
the possession of the threefold “farr” constituted
his title to the throne. There is an instance in the
present volume where after the death of a Shah his
two sons are both passed over in the succession as not
being possessed of the “farr.” Firdausi, it should be
noted, gives himself great latitude in the use of this
and many other expressions, but wherever the word
appears to be used in its correct sense we render it
by “Grace” or “ Glory.”

Farsang. The farsang is a measure of length, and
we have always translated it as “league,” although it
is about three-quarters of a mile longer than our
English league. |

Khilat, The word properly means a robe bestowed
by a ruler from his own wardrobe on some one as a
sign of special favour. As it was accompanied by

1 Cf. the Chinese expression ‘' foreign devils.”’
INTRODUCTION 83

other gifts it came to mean gifts generally when
bestowed by the ruler on asubject. We usually trans-
late the word as “robe of honour.”

Maidan. This word properly means a level piece
of ground attached to palaces or cities and used for
purposes of exercise or pastime. Hence it comes to
mean any level stretch of country, the space between
two hostile hosts on which opposing champions would
ride out and contend, a battlefield, park, & We
have adopted various translations of the word to express
these various meanings.

Mubid. The word properly means a chief priest of
the Magi, but is often merely equivalent to “sage,”
and is sometimes used of priests of other religious
denominations. When used in its proper sense we
translate it by “archmage” or “archimage, when
used . generally by “ priest.” The expression “ mubid-i
mubi-ddn,” «.e. chief of the mubids, we always trans-
late by “ high priest.”

Pahlavt and Pahlavan. The first of these two words
has been already explained." We render it by such
phrases as.“ olden tongue,” &c. The second is applied
by Firdausi{ to all his chief Irdnian characters other
than the Shahs, for the Pahlavan was essentially a
subject. The chief Pahlavan was the protagonist or
champion of the race for the time being but not
necessarily commander-in-chief. Sometimes he was
kept in reserve as a last resort when matters were
going very badly. The office was hereditary in the
heroic family of Garshdsp, and Rustam, with whom its
mythic glory becomes extinct, was its chief exponent.
We translate by “ paladin.”

Pari. It is hard to realise that this word, which in
Arab lips would become “ Fari,’ is not connected with
“fairy,” but it appears that for the etymology of the
latter we must go to the Latin “Fata.” In meaning,

1 p. 64.
84 INTRODUCTION

however, our “ fairy " and “fay” are the nearest English
equivalents, and we have so rendered the word.

Sardparda.—We translate this word by “camp en-
closure.” The saraparda was a screen of canvas or
other material encircling an encampment.

5. Some of the chief characters in the poem are
known in the original by several titles. Zal, the
father of Rustam, is also called Zal-i-Zar, Dastan-i-
Zand, Dastan-i-Sam, or simply Dastdn; Rustam him-
self is frequently referred to as the son of Zal, the
Klephant-bodied, the Matchless, &c., and there are
other instances of duplicate names. To follow the
original in this respect would involve the English
reader in hopeless confusion, and we have therefore
in such cases selected one name for a character and
kept to it, or if we employ a duplicate we only do it
in such a context that no doubt is possible as to the
identity of the person referred to.

Again, the poet uses the word Shah in a very wide
connection, but we employ it only when one of the forty-
nine rulers of Iran or the Sultan Mahmid is referred
to. Where the word is applied to others than the
above we translate it by king or monarch, &. We
have carried out the same principle in other cases
where it seemed to us that obscurity might arise.
The above are merely given as instances.

6. With regard to the spelling of proper names we
have followed the original with a few exceptions. We
have kept Cesar instead of Kaisar, Riman instead of
Rumi, Indian instead of Hindi, and there may be a
few more instances.’

For Khdkdn we invariably substitute the shorter
form Khan, as the expression “the Khdkdn of Chin”
is inconvenient metrically.

1 In the transliteration of proper names the best rule seems to be
to retain the thoroughly familiar in their familiar forms. For the

English reader ‘‘ Cesar said" is better than ‘“‘ Kaisar said,” or, more
correctly, “‘ Qaisar said.”
INEFRODUCTION 85

«In the Persian the letter k in the word Kabul for
instance is a different letter from that beginning the
name of the hero Karan, which im accord to present
usage should be spelt Qaran. Similarly the z in the
word Zabul is a different letter from that in Azargashasp,
but we thought that on the whole it was better not to
make such distinctions.

7. In cases in which it seemed to us that ambiguity
might arise we have spelt words used metaphorically
with a capital letter.

8. Those who desire to compare our translation
with the original will find on the pages of the former
references to the corresponding pages of the latter.
For instance, V. 233 against a line indicates the
beginning of that page in Vullers’ edition of the
text. |

g. A note on pronunciation will be found im-
mediately preceding the translation in each volume.

10. The headings of the reigns, parts, and sections
are reprinted at the end of the volume to serve as a
Table of Contents.

11. A list of some previous translations, the old
Persian calendar, some genealogical tables, and a note
on abbreviations are appended.

12. Finally we have to ask our readers not to
judge, and in all probability condemn, this work on the
strength of its first few pages. The Prelude and the
initial reigns are most difficult to make anything
of in a translation. This is not wholly our own
fault. The poet himself, as readers of the original
will bear witness, labours heavily, embarrassed perhaps
by the character of his subject-matter. “The poem,”
says Professor Noldeke, “does not obtain real life till
the reign of Jamshid.”* In spite of the heroic tale of
Kdwa the smith, and the pathetic misadventure of
Iraj, and much else that is both curious and interest-

1 NIN, 37.
86 INTRODUCTION

ing, we should be inclined to put the beginning of
the ‘real life” later still. At all events the reader
will find the poem growing in interest reign by
reign till poet and poem appear at their best in
the charming tale which fills for us the reign of
Mintchihr.
PREVIOUS TRANSLATORS OF THE
SHAHNAMA .

FRENCH.

MonL, already referred to, p. 76.

ITALIAN.

Pizzi, Firdusi. Il Libro dei Rei. Vols. i-vili. Torino, 1886—
1888. [This is a complete metrical translation with an elaborate
Introduction. ]

GERMAN,

GorrReES, Das Heldenbuch von Iran aus den Schah Nameh des
Firdusi. Berlin, 1820. [The translation extends from the beginning
of the history to the death of Rustam. It has a long and strange
Introduction and a quaint map of the scene of the Shahndma. ]

ScHack, Heldensagen von Firdausi. Berlin, 1865. [The transla-
tion extends from Faridun to the death of Rustam. ]

Ruckert, Firdosi’s Konigsbuch. Sage i-xxvi. Berlin, 1890-—
1895. [This extends as far as Rustam and Suhrdab.]

EN@QLISH.

JONES, Commentarii poéseos Asiaticae. London, 1774. [In this
work some passages froin the Shahndma are translated for the first
time into an European language. |

Cuampion, The Poems of Ferdosi. Calcutta, 1785. [The transla-
tion extends from the beginning of the history to the birth of
Rustam. |

ATEINSON, Soordb. Calcutta, 1814. The Shah Nameh translated
and abridged in prose and verse. London, 1832. [This work gives
a summary of the history, with short passages of translation inter-
spersed, up to the death of Sikandar (Alexander the Great).]

Weston, Episodes of the Schah-nameh of Ferdosee. 1815.

ROBERTSON, Roostum Zeboolah and Sohrab. 1829.
87
THE CALENDAR

THE old Persian year was solar and began at the

vernal equinox.

It consisted of 365 days divided

into 12 months of 30 days each, the five extra days
being added after the completion of the twelfth month
to fill up the time till the sun should re-enter Aries,
and spring and the new year begin on the 21st of
March. Each day of the month had its special genius
presiding over it, after whom it was named, thus :—

Day 1.

omy in & GH N

Urmuzd.

. Bahman.

. Ardibihisht.

. Sharivar,

. Sapandarmad.
. Khurdadd.,

. Murdad.

. Dai pa Adar.
. Adar.

. Abdan.

. Khurshid.

. M4h.

9 13.
» 14.
33 15.

Tir.
Gish.

Dai pa Mihr.

Of these thirty genu twelve

Day 16.
» ‘I7-
» 18.
» 19.
99 20.
9 «21.
1» (22.
9 23:
97 24.
» 25.
95 26.
9 «27.
5 «28.
» 29.
y 30:

Mihr,
Surush.
Rashn.
Farvardin.
Bahram.
Ram,

Bad.

Dai pa Din.
Din.
Ard,
Ashtad.
Asman.
Zamiyad.
Mahraspand.
Anairan.

were chosen to give

their names to the months as well, thus :—

Farvardin ,
.PRING  . + Ardibihisht .

SUMMER .

Khurdad .
Tir.
Murdad
Sharivar .

88

March 21 to April Ig.

. April.20 _,,

May 19.
May 20°. ,,_- June 18.
Junerg  ,, July 18.
July 19 ~=,, August 17.
August 18 ,, September 16.
INTRODUCTION 89 +

Mihr . . . . . September 17 to October 16.
AUTUMN . {ii . . . « « October 17 ~~ ,, November 15.
Adar ... . . . November 16 » December 15...
Dine = . . . . December 16 ., January r4.
WintER .4Bahman . .... January 15 .,, February 13.
Sapandérmad . . February 14 ,, March 15.

Thus the day Sapandérmad of the month Khurdad
would be equivalent to May 24th, and the day Khurdad
of the month Sapanddrmad'to February 19th.

Time was reckoned by days and nights, not by nights
and days as among the Jews and Muhammadans.

The twenty-four hours of the day and night were
divided into eight watches of three hours each.
go INTRODUCTION

GENEALOGICAL TABLE OF THE PISHDADIANS
(ACCORDING TO THE SHAHNAMA.)

GAIUMART (1).
Siyémak.
HUSHANG (2).

TAaHMURAS (3).

Mardas. JAMSHID (4). Several generations.

Shahrin4z=ZaHHAK (5)= Arnawaz, Abtin=Faranak.

| | ee

lgenera- 3 genera- Barmaidn. Kataidin. Shahrin4z=FariDun (6)=—Arnawé
WY

tion. tions.
2

|
Pashang.

 

K4kwi. Mibréb=Sindukht. | a Tar. Iraj.
I
Raddba=ZAl. Daughter = Son. Pashang=A daughter.
Rustam. Karkwi. MINGCHIHR (7).
NaupDar (8).
ee 1;
q
Tas. Gustaham. Tahmasp.
Zav (9).

GaARSHASP (10
INTRODUCTION gt

GENEALOGICAL TABLE OF THE PISHDADIANS.
(ACCORDING TO THE BUNDAHISH.)

 

Gaiamart.
Mashya.
Siy4mak,
|
Fravak.
H0sHana (1). Taz.
Yanghad, Virafshang.
Vivanghau. Zainigav.
JAMSHiD (3). Spitar. Narsih. TaHMURAS (2). Mardas.
11 generations. ZAHHAK (4).

Barmaitin. Kataidn. FARIDUN (5s).

Iraj. Tar. Salm.
Vanidar. Anastokh. Gazhak d. Daraushasp.
10 generations. Spaényasp.
MINUCHIBR (6). Térak.
NavuDaR (7). Zadsham.
Agéimashvak. Athrat.

Zav (8). GARSHASP (9).
INTRODUCTION

THE KINGS AND HEROES OF TURAN
(SHAHNAMA AND Buwpanisu COMBINED.)
FaR{ptn (6).
TOR,
Duraushdsp.
Sp&enyasp.
Turak.

ZADSHAM.

PASHANG.

 

Aghriras. AFRASIYAB. Garsiwaz. soubea Nastihan. | Pilsam. | Labhak.

 

Farshid ward. Haman. Barmén.

 

Pirdn.
A female de-
scendant or
t relative=Kal KAts (12). |
Pashang Jahn. | R&fn. cule varlagieSiytwush-- er} d. Rin.
(Shida). hos
|
A daughter Surkha. Kurakhén. |
= Tazhav.

. | |
Kal KHvusrav- Farid.
(13).

: ‘The race becomes extinct.
BAN.

BCM.

DEI.
DFKHP.
DHA.

DZA.
EP.
EAI.

GDF.

GHP.

ABBREVIATIONS

C.—Macan’s edition of the Shahnama.

L.—Lumsden’s do.
P,—Mohl’s do.
T.—Tihran do.
~V.—Vullers’ do.

A plain and literal translation of the Arabian Nights’
Entertainments, now entitled the Book of a Thousand
Nights and a Night, &. By Richard F. Burton.

The Chahar Magdla (“Four Discourses”) of Nidhami-i-
’Arudi-i-Samargandi. Translated into English by
Edward G. Browne, M.A., M.B.

J. Darmesteter, Etudes Iraniennes.
History of the Parsis. By Dosabhai Framji Karaka, C.S.I.

The History of Antiquity. From the German of Professor
Max Duncker. By the late Evelyn Abbott, M.A.

Professor Darmesteter’s Trans, of the Zandavasta in the
Sacred Books of the East. Reference to Parts! and
pages.

Eastern Persia, an Account of the Journeys of the Persian

‘Boundary Commission, 1870-71-72.

The History of India as told by its own Historians. By
Sir H. M. Elliot, K.C.B.

The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman
Empire. By Edward Gibbon, Esq. With Notes by
Dean Milman and M. Guizot. Edited, with additional
Notes, by William Smith, LL.D.

Histoire des Perses par le Comte de Gobineau.

1 The second edition of Part I. is referred to unless otherwise

specified,

93
94

HEP.

HHR.

HIE.

KA.
KUR.

MHP.
MLM.
MZA.

NIN.

NSEH.

NT.

OHS.

RFGM.

RK.

RP.
RPNS.
RSM.

SHC.

WPT.

INTRODUCTION

Essays on the Sacred Language, Writings, and Religion
of the Parsis. By Martin Haug, Ph.D. Edited and
enlarged by E. W. West, Ph.D.

Historical Researches. By A. H. L. Heeren. English

Translation.

The Indian Empire. By W. W. Hunter, C.S.1., C.LE,,
LL.D.

Asia. By A. H. Keane, F.R.GS.

Kitab-i-Yamini of Al Utbi. Translated by the Rev.
James Reynolds, B.A.

History of Persia, By Sir John Malcolm, G.C.B.
The Life of Muhammad. By William Muir, Esq.

Rev. L. H. Mills’ Trans. of the Zandavasta in the Sacred
Books of the East. Reference to Part and pages.

Das Iranische Nationalepos von Theodor Noldeke.

Sketches from Eastern History. By Theodor Néldeke.
English Translation.

Geschichte der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der Sasaniden.
Aus der Arabischen Chronik des Tabari Ubersetzt und
mit Ausfiihrlichen Erlauterungen und Erganzungen
Versehn von Th. Noldeke.

The History of the Saracens. By Simon Ockley. Fourth
Edition.

The Five Great Monarchies of the Ancient Eastern
World. By George Rawlinson, M.A.

The Koran translated from the Arabic.
well. Second Edition. —

Records of the Past.

By J. M. Rod-

First Series.
Do. Second Series,

The Seventh Great Oriental Monarchy.
Rawlinson, M.A.

The “ Higher Criticism” and the Verdict of the Monu-
ments. By the Rev. A. H. Sayce.

Dr. E. W. West’s Trans. of the Pahlavi Texts in the/Sacred
Books of the East. Reference to Parts and pages,

—___

By George

   
 

 
NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION

as in “ water.” !
as in “ pique.”
as in “rude.”
as in “servant.”
as in sin.”

er 8 Aa A

as oo in “ foot.”

at aszin “time.”

aw as ou in “cloud.”

g_ is always hard as in “give.”
kh as ch in the German “ buch.”
zh as zin “azure.”

1 Therefore ‘‘Sdm,” the name of the father of Zdl, should be pro-
nounced “ Saum.”’
THE SHAHNAMA
THE PRELUDE

ARGUMENT

The poet, after invoking the name of God and praising Him and
His wisdom, discourses of the world, of man, of the sun and moon,
of the Prophet and his companions, of the compilation of the
Sh4hn4ma, of the poet Dak{k{, and of his own labours in con-
nection with the poem, concluding with the praises of his patrons.

NOTE

§ 5. We read in the Zandavasta: “It (the sky) looks like a
palace, that stands built of a heavenly substance, firmly estab-
lished, with ends that lie afar, shining with its body of ruby over
the three-thirds (of the earth).”?

§ 7. For ’Ali see p. 12, Muhammadans are divided into many
sects. Muhammad is referred to as the lord of the sacred law,
7.e. the Kuran, of stream, milk, &e. We read there: “A picture
of the Paradise which is promised to the God-fearing! Therein
are rivers of water which corrupt not; and rivers of milk whose
taste changeth not ; and rivers of wine delicious to those that
quaff it ; and rivers of honey clarified: and therein are all kinds
of fruit for them, and forgiveness from their lord.” 2

§ ro. The name of Firdausi’s friend who procured for him the
Shdhndma of Abi Mansur (see pp. 67-69) is said to have been
Muhammad Lashkari.*

§ 11. Abi Manstr, son of Muhammad, may have been the son
of the Muhammad, son of Abdu’r-Razz4k, who had the prose
Shdhn4ma compiled (see p. 68), if the heading can be trusted.

§ 12. Abu’l Kdsim, 7.¢. Firdausi himself. The conquest of Kannij
took place after the completion of the Shahnama and in days

1 DZA, ii, 180. 2 RK, 419. 3 C, Persian Preface, 23.
99
100 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!

when Firdausi was in exile. The mention of Kannij appears
to be a flattering anticipation of events on the poet’s part.!

The “trusty minister” was no doubt Abu’l ’Abbds Fazl.

“The gardens of Jram ” were said to have been built by Shaddad,
son of Ad, that he might anticipate on earth the joys promised
him in Paradise by the prophet Hud. After toil extending over
centuries the work was completed, but as Shaddad was on the
point of entering into possession, he and all his host were slain
by a voice from heaven.?

Nasiru’d-Din, 2.e. Subuktigin (see p. 20).

Nast, Mahmiud’s youngest brother, acted as commander-in-chief,
and governed the province of Nishapur. After some years of
successful administration he was recalled to court and served his
brother in various capacities. He was a patron of learning and
died young.’ .-

“The prince of Tus” appears to have been Arslan JAzib, one
of Sultdn Mahmud’s most famous generals.