ee @ @ J
tats: WAR WANNA ’ . e

ei, re
pee at oo or SET TT Se PRS SE RN AB EFRON EOE SESE IE TSE PRES ES ST STH SS TE a SEPERATE N ecient ij ‘ aa
Eh ae 3 a * ae —o athal = PE geen ett 2." era a eee ee” 2 EEE EO oe
sir we cd Cs : i” ee ba = ee or I ae Re one ene ae ee a ee ee a Pe at ai a ee ee By
_ : > “tna “ ! A bas 7 a3 5 . 5 ae os » , , a 4 Sa, ¥
ad es & a ef FS eee ae en a oper ee a ee oe
F , " Te of om" ’ rae 3 _ 4 vn or r aA : . ae Se ae" P . ;
eae aren a ae ee ee ee ee ee a ee ran, ame ond

tty! Aghy 7 i a a a a re el
2” let Se We eee = a ee ee se a a a Feed atahe
2 Pm id ey ad = fos - aaa aed a Do ae dd a a s st 4 fs atl Ee a ei es ~< & — z ao ad oe ys"
; ; . : b . a ‘_) 3 any s Pa) - es ae = ‘ is s 4 a

eo eb ca ae & a i Te oe nT @Geanugeenra ante =m = ad i) a 7
ee ro eee a; a a i] al aad a se Ps . - Pana in oe ca a a ies a att | . a 7 F
a! oe oe aeweene = ah eh oS a. a ee en ee alt ofa! od
So RR ILE
weg ebenke eee” I i a oe Pn es kh é eteamah ahs n mar
7 ee ihe a a Se ee Mae a ia ae & S&S we Mas oe . ee
ry ay ze ww Pt es ee eo au ron s a ii, 3 ct TF Se ‘se Fa a cd oo Pe ry a - ; ye) : as ia =. . vat a ‘eA af” oP eS wv a aod ~ he?
ore a 6 a 2 he ener Ae eae aT eR ot SABRE BE SM.
, a a oie te gne a * a oe ne s aoe ee

Se, i Pon - oN re ee ane a Ma a ro 7 es ery cs cs cr

       

  
  

 

 

— a Se

ae] Re :
. J

en el yee eS Pe et Re Se RR
o_—" ay By a Fs we SS an ee a res re ‘eown es ae § em Le 2 . a Sool p
ee a By Pa a an a ee aes pa ai ot ame Pia an a - ca han ad = ~ * bs nl * Si oad ee
a ae, ae ae xs Pa baat ie ie. A, . A i. Ss Yt) i. 8 Pa ms 6 ra a Ap R
x es a eo a Po =. of bat

i es * & vo ae ss, Pe in a ee <2 i-
ae a ae a

+ eo

a a a ae ee ee a , :

A Aoleheha eae
oes ee fe area ee ee 2 oe hate eter amare 2 se is
ry Lo) oe he Oe ee eee, ater aera Pathe, o “ns | Ps
2 2 2 oe ee ee ee Be Peek a ts ee Be aid de ae Oe a a rs - * 9
| a ae } A a a | Oe i. .~ F = Te ; a a a ao & a ae
> . —_— , an = - a a . yn a - Pas ve Ea re rm ‘

eee a a a el al ee ea ;

yt LEE MANS Aah henge aaa te

~ a rere es 2 eS he ee ee eS he eee a, Paar a ya

ie an a fm a eS is a ae a ee | La a ic Aaa i a en ee eg alk

- ake RK ER MASA BAS EMEA SS Sk sh a al a os
>a Pd o * cont a Fd he - “wy r

Pr) Re # oa bo oe » a
oes hee"e se) es 0 '9 0 0 8 88 8 ee
5 & Se ee a OT, MR oe a, ila iia a
ae a eee Uae | Gae Wak tae eee ae a el ae
— a’ - Se r a ~~) al 4 “a

A
: a. eon ne | =

aot a Te a . = ;
a a a a ae
me ro : oe ae 2 . : , aan n oe ree]
astahtatata ae tomaeyeS Oe a :
es ‘ si rs \ 7 , - , s
rs “f eee a a a a a im nm an | Es ad Ky aes bs Ss  & Bs a a a el | a a ee
CC Rg » 8 - ; ne > *s Pd _ : _— > oe ere
ay A og oa a a ar a a wee eee aan hee, Roe. Soe a %
ae a a a er a. oe oe ae & . a anes 2 oe oe
PR vee n- 3 > i ‘ i = , 4 rat a o- £ P <3 Ks a S =} _ . % 4 ss a Py a S
re Vee ae es eee £8 8 Cy . 4 we .% aR ~ re ee a ee a
we, ? RY S ; *, wi? P P oa 38 + Bs be
P Ef : . — ra - em s ro , -— 2 te ae
2. 2 eo 3 ey a DR SB A i on Bo a i a ie
' F ; — a ae 1 a —— “> = a ae | Phe a a |

*
2.

Ca BFS ‘Fa - S 5 Nes ! a bs ‘
r 9 | a ee , ne % ae se bd 4 a Pid ,2 A] 1 4 nace on m ae ea > % , ‘ a | rs  £ % -
Ay er Ra a. Ma a a as a a a % Pa aad oe Pe Fe Fy Me Oe ar ee ee ee
, E ry 4 a aaa a ae > a 2 oy we ae ee Te . S
" - us re) ” A * = ae Ph “
] < . f ra 2, yi Pe
E +e. ; +
mM)

|

!

|

w
c
w
>
2
sa

———_
SS
=
—_—_—
=
————
SS
——
——

™
=
~

     
   

OARS
AN E

Ren
       

are
e Ba A

tt) a a may iti
f t fv Ph
 
 
 
TRUBNER’S
ORIENTAL SERTES
Complete Work now Ready. Post Svo. cloth, price 10s. Gd. each.

THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI.
Done into English by
ARTHUR GEORGE WARNER, M.A.
AND
EDMOND WARNER, B.A.

The year A.D. 1010 saw the completion of the Shahndma, the great
Persian epic. Its author, the poet Firdausi, spent over thirty labori-
ous years in its composition, only to experience, when the task had
been achieved, a heart-breaking disappointment well worthy of in-
clusion in any record of the calamities of authors. His work has
survived the test of time, and by general consent is accounted to be
one of the few great epics of the world. Geographically, and in some
other respects, it may be said to stand half-way between the epics of
Europe and those of India. In its own land it has no peer, while in
construction and subject-matter it is unique. Other epics centre
round some heroic character or incident to which all else is subser-
| vient. Im the Shdhndma there is no lack éither of heroes or of in-
cidents, but its real hero is the ancient Persian people, and its theme
their whole surviving legendary history from the days of the First
Man to the death of the last Sdsanian Shah in the middle of the seventh
century of ourera. It is the glory of the Persian race that they alone
among all nations possess such a record, based as it is on their own
traditions and set torth in the words of their greatest poet. In another
sense, too, the Shahnama is unique. The authers of the other great
epics tell us little or nothing of their own personalities or of their
sources of information. Their works are fairy palaces suspended in
mid air; we see the result, but know not how it was achieved. The
author of the Shahndma takes us into his confidence from the first, so
that in reading it we are let into the secret of epic-making, and can
apply the knowledge thus gained to solve the problem of the con-
struction of its great congeners. To the student of comparative
mythology and folk-lore, to the lover of historic romance or romantic
history, and to all that are fond of tales of high achievements and the
gests of heroes, the Shahndma is a storehouse of rich and abundant
material. To set forth a complete presentment of it with the needful
notes and elucidations is the object of the present translation, made
from two of the best printed texts of the original—that of Vullers and
| Landauer, and that of Turner Macan.

 

 

 
THE

SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

DONE INTO ENGLISH BY
ARTHUR GEORGE WARNER, M.A,
AND

EDMOND WARNER, B.A.

“ The homes that are the dwellings of to-day
Will sink ‘neath shower and sunshine to decay,
But storm and rain shall never mar what I

Have built—the palace of my poetry.’’ ,
FIRDAUSI.
VOL: IX Uv) /
oe
Vv a
a

¥

LONDON:
KEGAN PAUL, TRENCH, TRUBNER & CO., L™

BROADWAY HOUSE: CARTER LANE, E.C.
1925
The vights of tvanslation and of vetroduction ave reserved.

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY THE DEVONSHIRE PRESS, TORQUAY
THE SHAHNAMA

MOE. UX.
Mand

 

*

wy

 
et tee

Page ix, lines 1-3, for

CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS

“Vy ly Xi,’ vead “vii, xiii, xvi’

Page 130, Col. 1, line 14 from bottom, OPS: Kay CCM VR

«e

Page 131, Col. 3, line 21, for ‘‘ xii’? vead ‘‘ xv.”
Pages 123-133, in the case of Roman numerals, for “vii” vead

Page
Page
Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page

‘ix, for Vill” read ““x

195, Col.
TQ0), Colt

216, Col.

I57, V,
22 Col
240, Col.

245, Col.

zon, Col!

.2, line 13 from bottom, before ‘ 102” insert ‘i.’

”

etc.
2, line 11, delete first comma.
1, line 11 from bottom, delete ‘“‘ Ahran.”’

2, after line 10 from bottom, insert ‘ Reign of,
281 seg. Note on, v, 281.”

1, line 8 from bottom, delete ‘‘ Bandwi.”’

J,
2, HINES U2 Sofas TO2). reads 762."

I, line 11 from bottom, after ‘‘ of’ insert comma.

257, Col. 2, line 11, before and after “ vitrified’’ insert

comma.
268, Col.
276, Col.
279, Col.

289, Col.

302, Col.

310, Col.

apr, Col:
T9O 4

327, Col:

328, Col.

334, Col.
337, Col.
362, Col.
363, Col.

366, Col.

372, Col.
385, Col.

386, Col.
ce 176.”
Zor. Col.

2, line 15 from bottom, after “‘ of’ inseyt comma.
1, line 3 from bottom, read ‘‘ Olympias.”
2, line 5 from bottom, for ‘‘ 363’ read ‘‘ 263.”

“ec a”

LT SHnes 255 fore TAO. 2 Treade. P40.
4 4

2, line 10 from bottom, for ‘85’ read “25.”

“e

Ener se for “796. Tread “777.”

2, line 15 from bottom, after “by ”’ insert ‘ viti,

2, line 3r end, add “ix 23.”

Delinev26, joy “5205 |" svead 105;
line 7, for “‘ Northman”’ vead ‘“‘ Northmen.”’

?

line 2 from bottom, add ‘“‘ viii, 108.”’

I,
2,
I, line 7 from bottom, imseyt comma at end.
1, line 25 end, insert comma.

I

, ce LY

lines 235 befoves 137) msert «= vil.

1, line 44, delete “ vi.”
1, line 23, delete “ 176.

2, line 10 from bottom, after ‘“‘ Khurdsan,’

ce ”?

’

insert

2, line 7 from bottom, delete ‘‘ Yazdagird.”
 
PREFATORY NOTE

The General Index at the end of this volume should
be consulted in preference to the Indexes to the
separate volumes of this work.—E.W.
 
CONTENTS

PREFATORY NOTE
ABBREVIATIONS :
NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION .

THE SASANIAN DYNASTY (concluded)

KuBpdApD (COMMONLY CALLED SHfrwi)—
SECT.

erlow Shirwi ascended the Throne, announced his
Will, and sent Chiefs to his Father with
Counsel and Excuses

2. How Khusrau Parwiz answered Shirwi :

3. How Shirwi grieved for Khusrau Parwiz and how
the Chiefs were displeased thereat z

4. How Barbad lamented Khusrau Parwiz, cut off his
own Fingers, and burned his Instruments of
Music

5. How the Chiefs demanded: from Shiewi the Death
of Khusrau Parwifz and how he was slain by
Mihr Hurmuzd :

6. How Shirwi asked Shirin in fee how ‘Shirin
killed herself, and how Shirwi was slain .

ARDSHIR, SON OF SHfRWi—
1. How Ardshir, Son of Shirwi, ascended the Throne
and harangued the Chiefs
2. How Guraz was displeased at Ardshir asin Shah
and how he caused Ardshir to be slain by
Piriz Son of Khusrau

GuRAz (ALSO CALLED FarAy{n)—
1. How Guraz (also called Fardyin) received News of
the Slaying of Ardshir, hastened to [ran, took
Possession of the Throne, and was killed by
Shahranguraz

PURANDUKHT—
1. How Purdndukht ascended the Throne and slew
Piruz, Son of Khusrau, and how her own
Life ended

ix

PAGE

x1
xii

27

29

36

44

ie)

51
x

CONTENTS

AZARMDUKHT—

SECT.

1. How Azarmdukht ascended the Throne and how

she died

FARRUKHZAD—
1. How Farrukhzad ascended the Throne and how he

was slain by a Slave

YAZDAGIRD—
1. How Yazdagird ascended the Throne and addressed

o

2.

on

con

10.

LEI ge
12.

13.

14.

ee

INDEX

the Chiefs

How Sa’ad, Son of Wakkas, invaried an, ee
Yazdagird sent Rustam to oppose him, and
how Rustam wrote a Letter to his Brother

. How Rustam wrote to Sa’ad, Son of Wakkas,

and how he replied

. How Rustam fought with Sa’ad, cont of Wakkés,

and was slain

. How Yazdagird consulted in the fais aa

went to Khurdsan .

. How Yazdagird wrote to Méhwi of Stir
. How Yazdagird wrote to the Marchlords of Tis
. How Yazdagird went to Tus and how Mahwi of

Sur met him .

. How Mahwi of Sur incited Bishan £6 war with

Yazdagird and how Yazdagird fled and hid
himself in a Mill

How Mahwi of Sur sent the Miller to kill Veet,
and how the Archmages counselled Mahwi
to forbear

How Yazdagird was slain by nee the Miller

How Mahwi of Sur was informed of the Obsequies
of Yazdagird and ascended the Throne

How Bizhan, hearing of the Slaying of Yazdagird,
and of Mahwi of Stir’s Accession to the
Throne, led forth the Host to fight with him

How Mahwi of Sur was taken and slain by Order
of Bizhan

Account of the Completion of ie Shale ana

GENERAL Lager OF Neen rene
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS .
CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS
GENERAL INDEX

PAGE

59

61

7O

G23
78
83
85
89
90

95
96

Lor
107

I1l2

II5
118
121
23
135
139

177
191
BCM.

CTC.

LEG.
NIN.

NT.

RM.

RSM.

ie

ABBREVIATIONS

C.—Macan’s edition of the Shahnama

L.—Lumsden’s do.
P.—Mohl’s do.
T.—Tihran do.
V.—Vullers’ do.

The Chahar Maqala (‘‘ Four Discourses ’’) of Nidhami-i-
*Artdi-i-Samarqandi. Translated into English by
Edward G. Browne, M.A., M.B.

Theophanis Chronographia. Ex Recensione Ioannis
Classeni.

The Lands of the Eastern Califate. By G. Le Strange.

Das Iranische Nationalepos von Theodor Néldeke.

Geschichte der Perser und Araber sur Zeit der Sasaniden

. von. Th. Néldeke.

The Rauzat-us-safa; or, Garden of Purity. ... By
Mirkhond. . . . Translated . . . by E. Rehatsek.

The Seventh Great Oriental Monarchy. By George
Rawlinson, M.A.

Chronique de Abou-Djafar-Mo’hammed-Ben-Djarir-Ben-
Yezid-Tabari, traduite . . . Par M. Hermann Zoten-
burg.

Xlil
*.

 
NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION

‘

a@ as in “‘ water.”’

¢ as in “ pique.”

# as in “‘ rude.”

a as in “‘ servant.”

4 as) ines Sine

# as in “ foot.”’

az as in “ time.”

au as in ou in “ cloud,”

g is always hard as in “ give.”
kh as ch in the German “ buch,”

has Zin “azure,”

XV
 
IV

THE SASANIAN DYNASTY
(Concluded)

VOL, Ix.
6

 
XLIV
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHIRW1)

HE REIGNED SEVEN MONTHS

ARGUMENT

Kubdd on his accession sends two chiefs to accuse of mis-
government the fallen and imprisoned Shah, Khusrau Parwiz,
who justifies himself at great length. His fall is made the
subject of a lament by Barbad, the minstrel, who afterwards
mutilates himself. The chiefs, noticing sy mptoms of remorse
in Kubdad, insist upon the death of Khusrau Parwiz who is
killed with all his other sons. Kubdd falls in love with,
and wishes to marry, Shirin, who poisons herself rather than
consent, and Kubad himself is poisoned soon afterwards.

NOTE

The days of the reign of Kubéd (Kobad_II., Feb.-Sept.,
A.D. 628) were few and evil. Tradition already had prepared
the ground for this in the unfavourable account given of
his early years.1 The murder of his father was followed by
that of all his brothers, and by the tragic death of Shirin,
while in addition to all these horrors a frightful pestilence
broke out in his reign and the great mortality that ensued
still further weakened the resources of an already almost
exhausted country and helped to pave the way for the suc-
cessful Arab invasion of a few years later on. Kubad is
represented in the poem as a loutish, uneducated youth,?
but even if his abilities had been great it is difficult to see
how he could have extricated himself from the coil in which

1See Vol. viii., p. 390 anh
3
4 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

he found himself involved without mishap to himself or
others. He owed his release from prison and perhaps his
life to the very conspirators that subsequently demanded
of him for their own security the death of his father. To
have refused would have been fatal to himself, while in all
probability his father and his brothers, with the exception
of one who would have been made Shah, would have perished
all the same. It is inconceivable that the conspirators would
have run the risk to themselves of restoring Khusrau Parwiz,
with his black record of ingratitude as instanced by his treat-
ment of Bandwi and Gustaham,!: to his former position as
ruler. With the exception of his infatuation for Shirin, which
hardly can be regarded as historical, Kubdéd throughout his
short reign was the victim of circumstances.

§§ land2. Kharrdd, son of Barzin, was one of the most
trusted ministers of Khusrau Parwiz and planned the assassina-
tion of Bahram Chibina.2 According to Tabari he fell at
the battle of Dha Kar.*

As the epoch of the Sdsdnian Dynasty draws to an end
through scenes of deepening tragedy the legitimist leanings
of the tradition seem to become more and more pronounced
and we have an instance here. It is hardly to be supposed,
historically speaking, that formal charges of misgovernment
were drawn up against, and as formally answered by, Khusrau
Parwiz, but rather that someone, desirous of vindicating
that Shah’s memory and conversant with the circumstances
of the time, soon after his death drew up the charges and the
replies thereto. Versions of them are given in both the
Arabic and Persian Tabarfi and elsewhere. Four of the
charges are found in both the Tabaris as well as in the Shah-
nama.4 They are :—

1. The murder by Khusrau Parwiz of his father Hurmuzd.

2. The illegitimate accumulation of treasure as a result
of the financial oppression of the people.

3. The harsh treatment of the royal princes.

4. The refusal to restore the True Cross.

To these the Arabic Tabari adds :—

1. The general ill-treatment of all prisoners.

2. Enforced recruiting for the royal Haram even of
women already married.

 

1See Vol. viii., p. 354 seq. 27d. p, 331 Seq. Id. p. 19a.
‘NT, 363 seq, Li ee seq,
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHiRW1I) 5

3. The keeping of the troops for a long period absent
from home.

The Persian Tabari adds :—

1. The imprisonment of the troops defeated by the Arabs
at Dha Kar and by Heraclius. .

2. The exactions of arrears of tribute for the previous
twenty or thirty years.

3. The attempt to slay the youthful Yazdagird (after-
wards the last Sasanian Shah).

4. The deposition of Nu’man, prince of Hira.1

5. The mutilation and subsequent execution of Mardan-
shah.”

In the Arabic Tabari eight charges are made against
Khusrau Parwiz two of which—those relating to the royal
Haram and the refusal to restore the “ True Cross ’’—are
left unanswered.

In the Persian Tabari eleven charges are formulated to
each of which in the same order an answer is made. Some
of the charges, however, must be regarded as later additions
while that relating to Nu’man is not likely to have suggested
itself to a Persian amd must come from an Arab source. In
the Shahnama there are eight charges, all of which are more
or less answered, but not in the same order as they are pre-
ferred, but in the following :—1, 6, 7, 8, 2, 5, 3, 4. Thus
Khusrau Parwiz replies to the most serious accusations—
those of offences against persons—first. The Shahnama
agrees most closely with the Arabic Tabari, supplies the missing
answer with regard to the “‘ True Cross,” but does not deal
with the yravamen of the royal Haram question, as that par-
ticular charge is not one of those mentioned in the poem.

Galinush subsequently served in the war against the Arabs,
fought at the Battle of the Bridge, and was perhaps slain at
Kadisiya.®

§5. Indignant legitimate tradition is naturally very
wroth with Mihr Hurmuzd, the murderer of Khusrau Parwiz,
whom it describes as the lowest of the low and vilest of the
vile. According to Tabari, however, Mihr Hurmuzd was the
son of Mardanshah, the governor of Nimrutz and one of the
most obedient and faithful of Khusrau Parwiz’ officials. In
the Persian Tabari’s version of the Romance of Bahram

 

1 See Vol. viii., p. 190. a Seeup sO:
* NT, p. 365 note.. RM, Pt. II., vol. iii., pp. 95, 116.
6 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

Chibina that hero’s brother, Yalan-sina in the Shahnama, is
called Mardanshaih.  Yalan-sina is always represented as
being one of Bahram Chubina‘s most loval adherents just as
the other brother, Gurdwi, was a firm supporter of Khusrau
Parwiz, while their.sister Gurdya held an intermediate position,
faithful to Bahram Chibina, but opposing his kingly ambition
in every way in her power. Later on when married to Gus-
taham, the maternal uncle of Khusrau Parwiz, she agreed,
on condition that she should become the Shah’s wife and that
a full amnesty should be given to all her adherents, to murder
hes husband and did so. There would be nothing strange
therefore in Mardanshah, if identical with Yalan-sina, becoming
reconciled to, and receiving high office from, Khusrau Parwiz.
He would serve one master as faithfully as he served the other.
In the circumstances the strange thing would have been tor
the treacherous Shah not to have taken the first convenient
occasion against him. According to the story the Shah,
two years before his deposition, consulted the astrologers
who informed him that his death would come from Nimruz.
He therefore began to suspect and summoned Mardanshah,
but finding no pretext for putting him to death, as he was
perfectly loyal and withal an aged man, determined merely
to cut off his right hand and make him a large present of money
as compensation. The sentence was carried out. Mardan-
shah regarded such a mutilation as worse than death and,
when shortly afterwards the Shah was good enough to send
and express his regret for what had occurred, asked the
Shah to grant hima boon. The Shah swore to do so, on which
Mardanshah requested that his head should be struck off
in order to wipe out the disgrace put upon him. The Shah,
bound by his oath, felt himself obliged to consent and the
execution took place accordingly. The Shah wished to make
Mardanshah’s son governor of Nimrtz, but he refused and
withdrew from the army.!_ He joined the conspiracy against
Khusrau Parwiz? and by avenging his father on the Shah
justified the prediction of the astrologers.

The account given by Theophanes of the last days of the
Shah is different. As a general rule it is not prudent to put
{aith in stories of what occurred in Oriental palaces or prisons,
but owing to the special circumstances of the case his in-
formation may be good in this instance, as it appears to be

 

AND, D.. 379. Lay, dle 3SOs 2 See Vol. vit, p: 196,
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHIRW1I) a

based on letters written by Heraclius. After the capture of
Khusrau Parwiz by the conspirators, he was bound and
confined in the ‘‘ House of Darkness,” which he had himself
built as a stronghold for his treasures. Here he was sparingly
fed on bread and water for, said Shirwi: ‘‘ Let him eat the
gold that he has vainly amassed, and for whose sake he has
starved many, and made the world itself a desert.” Shirwi
also sent satraps to revile and spit upon him, had his son
Mardasas, whom he had wished to crown, slain before his eyes,
and all his other sons as well, sent his enemies to beat and
spit upon him, and, after five days of such treatment, had him
put to death with arrows. Shirwi then wrote to Heraclius
to announce the death of the detested Khusrau Parwiz,
arranged terms of peace, released all the captives, and restored
the “‘ True Cross.”! With regard to these latter statements
of Theophanes it should be observed that peace was not
concluded, and the “* True Cross” restored, till after the death
of Shirwi.?

According to Tabari Kubiad had Mihr Hurmuzd put to
death.

§6. The association of Khusrau Parwiz and Shirin began,
it would seem,? before his accession to the throne, and he
reigned for thirty-eight years. If Shirwi really wished to
marry Shirin it must have been for political motives and
because she had been so much in his father’s confidence and
might furnish useful information. For a son to marry his
father’s wives was, according to Persian ideas, quite the correct
procedure in the circumstances.

Kubad is said to have been bitterly reproached by his
two sisters, Pardndukht and Azarmdukht, for his share in
the deaths of his father and brothers, and to have suffered
much from sickness and remorse. He died at Dastagird,
but from what cause is uncertain.® The plague was very
virulent at the time. Poison was often made to account
for what was really due to disease.

 

LCT CH i.5'502: *NT, p. 392 and note. *Id. p. 382.
+See vol. ‘vili.,.p. 383. ‘NT, p. 384 and notes.
8 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

$1

How Shirwt ascended the Throne, announced his Will,
and sent Chiefs to his Father with Counsel and
Excuses

Now when Shirwi sat on the goodly throne,

And donned the royal crown so much desired,

The leaders of the [ranians each drew near

To proffer him the homage due to kings,

Exclaiming : “‘ Worshipful and honoured Shah !

Know, God gave thee the crown, and now thou sittest

Securely on the throne of ivory,

And may thy sons and scions have the world.”
Kubad replied: ‘‘ Be ever conquering

And happy. Never will we practise ill.

How good is justice with benevolence !

The world will we keep peaceful and cut off

The works of Ahriman by every right,

Ancestral precedent that greateneth

The Glory of our Faith. I will dispatch

A message to my sire and tell him all.

He is in evil odour in the world

Through his ill deeds: let him excuse his faults

To God and turn to custom and the way.

If he shall heed me he will not resent

My conduct. Then will I devote myself

To state-affairs and strive to compass justice

Both publicly and privily, do good

Where good is due, and break no poor man’s heart.

I need two honest men of goodly speech,

Whose memories are charged with ancient lore.”
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHIRWf1) 9

He asked the assembly : ‘“* Whom shall I employ ?
Who is most shrewd and honest in [ran ?”

The warriors all suggested by their looks
Two men of lore if they should give consent.
Kubad perceived whom the Iranians
Agreed to choose : one of them was Ashtad,
The other was Kharrad, son of Barzin,

The old—two sages eloquent and heedful.
Kubad addressed them thus: ‘‘ O ye wise men,
Ye chiefs experienced and veteran !
Deem not the conduct of the world too toilsome,
Because the Great by travail compass treasure.
It is for you now to approach the Shah ;
Perchance through you he may conform himself.
Appeal to him by instance new or old
As there is need.”’

With tears unwillingly
Those sages made them ready. When Kharrad,
Son of Barzin, and when Ashtad, who had
Gashasp for sire, had mounted on their steeds,
As bidden, Kubad said: ‘“* Now with right good will
*Tis yours to take the road to Taisaftn,*
To carry to my glorious sire a message,
And bear it all in mind from first to last.
Say: ‘’Twas no fault of ours nor did the [ranians
Cause this, but having left the way of Faith
Thou hast thyself incurred God’s chastisement,
For, first, no son legitimate will shed
His sire’s blood thowsh 4 impure or give assent
Thereto and fill the hearts of upright folk
With pain. Again, thy treasures fill the world,
And thine exactions reach all provinces,
While, thirdly, many horsemen brave and famed
Within fran who gladdened there have left
Son, country, and their own pure kith and kin,

*Couplet omitted.
IO THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Have parted, this to Chin and that to Rum,
And now are scattered o’er each march and land.
Again, when Cesar, who had done and borne
So much for thee, had given thee a host
And daughter too with treasure and much else,
Desired of thee the Cross of Christ for Rum,
So that his land might be revived thereby,
How did the Cross of Jesus profit so
Thy treasures when complaisance on thy part
Would have made Cesar glad ? But thou didst not
Restore it, hadst not wit enough for that,
Or one to guide thee to humanity.
Again, thy greed was such that wisdom’s eye
Was all obscured in thee, and thou didst seize
The chattels of the poor whose curses brought
Ill on thy head. Thou slewest thy mother’s brothers, !
Two loyal men who gave thy throne a lustre.
Moreover thou hadst sixteen sons whose days
And nights were passed in prison while no chief
Could sleep secure from thee but hid in fear.?
Know, that which hath befall’n thee is from God ;
Reflect on thy foul deeds. As for myself,
I am but as the instrument in all
This wrong, am but the heading of the tale.
By God, ’twas not my fault, no aim of mine
To wreck the Shah’s throne! Now for all seek grace,
And say so to these chieftains of [ran ;
Turn from ill deeds to God—the Guide to good—
Who may abate the woes that thou hast brought
Upon thyself.’ ”’

On hearing this the twain
Departed with their hearts all seared and sore
Till, sorrowful and weeping, they arrived
At Taisaftin and in that city sought

1 Bandwi and Gustaham.
* This sentence comes at the end of the speech in the text.
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHIiRWf) 11 ‘

The palace of Marusipand for there
The exalted king resided. Galintish
Sat at the palace-gate : thou wouldst have said :—
** Earth is convulsed before him!’ He was armed
In helm and breastplate, all the Arab steeds
Wore bards, and all his soldiers were drawn up,
Equipped, and sword in hand. He grasped a mace
Of steel, his heart all fire and storm. Now when
Kharrad, son of Barzin, and when Ashtad,
Son of Gashasp, those sages twain, dismounted,
He rose forthwith, rejoiced to look on them,
And gave them place befitting, hailing them
As famous chiefs. The eloquent Kharrad
First laved his tongue in valour and then said
To Galintish: ‘ Kubad the glorious
Hath donned in peace the Kaian crown. fran,
Turan and Rum have tidings that Shirwit
Is seated on the throne of king of kings.
Why this cuirass and helm and massive mace ?
Who is thine enemy ? ”’
Said Galinush :---

‘**O veteran! may all thy doings prosper.
Thou art concerned about my tender frame C. 2029
Because I am in iron garniture.
I bless thee for thy kindness ; thou deservest
That I shall sprinkle jewels over thee.
Thy words are naught but good, and may the sun
Be thine associate in the world. Declare
Why thou hast come, then look for my reply.”

He thus gave answer: “ Glorious Kubad
Commissioned me to bear Khusrau Parwiz
A message and if now thou wilt ask audience?
I will deliver what the worid-lord said—

1 That being the name by which he had been generally known,
his real name (Kubad) having been kept secret. See Vol. viil.,

PP. 371, 416.
* Reading with P.
12 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

That monarch of the flock.”
Said Galintish :—
‘* Who can remember words so well as thou,
O worshipful ? Yet nathless Shah Kubad
Gave me full many a counsel touching this,
And charged me, saying: ‘ Let none have by day
Or night an audience of Khusrau Parwiz
Unless thou hearest what the messenger
Hath got to say in Persian new or old.’ ”
Ashtad said: ‘‘ I hold not my message secret,
O fortunate! It is: ‘ The sword is fruiting,
And nuzzling princes’ heads.’ In this regard
Now ask for audience of Khusrau Parwiz
That we may tell the message of the Shah.”
This hearing Galinish arose, made fast
His mail, went to the Shah with folded arms,
As servants should, and said thus: ‘‘ Live for ever,
O Shah! - May evil never vex thy heart.
There cometh by Ashtad and by Kharrad,
Son of Barzin, a message from the Shah
From court.”
Khusrau Parwiz laughed out and said :—
‘* Speak wiser words for if he be the king
Then what am I, and why am I within
This narrow prison, and why need’st thou ask
That I shall grant an audience unto any,
Be their words false or true ?”
So Galinush
Returned to those two warriors, reported
The answer of the paladin, and said :—
‘“ Now go with folded arms, declare your message,
And hearken his reply.”
Those sages twain
Of honest speech inswathed their visages
In sashes brought from Chin and, when they saw
The Shah, did reverence and waited long
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHIRWI) 13

What while he sat upon a lofty throne
Adorned with effigies of sheep and wolves,
Impleached with gold and gems, with under him
A couch of yellow broidery. He leaned
On cushions hued like lapis-lazuli,
Held a fine quince and drowsed there all amort.
When he beheld those chiefs supreme in wisdom C. 2030
He roused himself and secretly invoked
God’s help. He laid that fine quince on the cushions
That he might welcome those two wayfarers.!
The quince slipped from the cushions, rolled unbruised
Upon the couch and thence from throne to floor.
Ashtad ran, took it up, wiped off the dust,
And laid the quince upon his head. The world-lord
Turned from Ashtad that he might neither see
Nor scent the quince. They set it on the throne,
And stood themselves. The matter of the quince?
Perturbed Khusrau Parwiz who boded ill,
Looked up to heaven, and said: ‘ O truthful Judge!
Who can establish one whom Thou o’erthrowest,
Who join what Thou hast broken? When bright
fortune

Departeth from a race it bringeth sorrow
Because the day of joy is passed away.”

Then to Ashtad: *‘ Now for thine ambassage
From mine unnatural child of ill repute,
And from that handful of conspirators,
My hateful and black-hearted enemies.
Malignant fools are they and in their folly
Most wretched. “Fortune will desert our race ;
None will rejoice again; the crown and throne
Will pass to those unfit ; this royal Tree
Will be destroyed ; the Base will be exalted ;
The spirits of the Great grow sorrowful.

“ces deux esclaves.’ Mohl,
* Reading with P.
C.

2031

14 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSf

The majesty will bide not with our sons,
Or with our kindred or posterity ;
Their friends all be their chiefest enemies,
Revilers and destroyers of the race.
This quince hath made the secret evident ;
The throne of king of kings will bear no fruit.
Now tell to me the words that thou hast heard :
I count his less than water in the stream.”

Then those two men released their tongues to speak,
And told all that Kubad, his son, had said,
Not keeping e’en a whisper back from him.
The king of kings, when he had heard the message,
Writhed with distress and heaved a deep, cold sigh. ~
Then said he to those chiefs: ‘* Hear my response,
And bear it to the young prince, every word.
Say: * Quit thine own misdeeds ere blaming others’.
What thou hast uttered are they words of thine ?
A murrain on the prompter !!_ Speak not so
As to rejoice thy foe with thy fool’s talk,
And let him learn that thou hast not the wisdom
To furnish speech with knowledge from thy brains.
If thy trust is in words that profit not
Thou mak’st default in soul and wisdom too.
He that shall call thee wicked, then acknowledge
Thee to be world-lord, should not sit before thee,
And order matters whether great or small.
Think not in future of such messages
Or thou wilt cause thy foemen to rejoice.
My state hath been appointed me by God ;
My hopes are set upon the other world,
And thou by these thy charges which are lies
Wilt gain no glory in the nobles’ eyes.’ ”

+ Reading with P. and T,
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHfRWI) 15

How Khusrau Parwiz answered Shirwt

* Now will I make full answer that thou mayst
Repeat my words in public. They will serve
As my memorial when I am gone—

A truthful statement of my case—and thou
Wilt know, when I reveal my grief and travail,
That all my treasures were derived from toil.
Thou speakest in the first place of Hurmuzd,
His anger with me, and those bygone days :
My father’s wrath against us was aroused

By slanderer’s words and thus confusion came.
When I had learned what occupied his thoughts
I left fran by night, avoiding roads.

He sought my death by poison; I perceived
No antidote but flight and so I fled,

And was not taken in the net of bale.

I heard that ill had come upon the Shah,

And quitted Barda’ when the news arrived.
That knave Bahram Chubina with his troops
Opposed us on the battlefield. I fled

From him too on the day of fight that I
Might fall not in his clutches. Afterwards

I came a second time and bravely fought,

My troublous fortune passed away and all

The realm that I had lost returned to me.

My contest with him was no brief affair ;

The whole world were spectators of the strife.
By the command of God who multiplieth

His benefits on us, and is the Guide

In good and ill, fran and Turkistan?

1 Turan in the text.
C. 2032

16 THE SHAHNAMA. OF FIRDAUSI

Submitted and Bahram Chubina’s plans

Were foiled. Released from war with him I hasted,
First, to take vengeance for my father’s death.
Bandwi and Gustaham, my mother’s brothers,
Men that had not a peer in any land,

Had risked their lives for me and were all mine
In love as well as kinship, but there were

My father’s death and mine own grief thereat ;

I was not sluggish to avenge his blood.

I lopped Bandwi both hand and foot for he

Had made the Shah’s place dark, while Gustaham,
Who disappeared and sought some distant nook,
Was slain all unawares by my command :

Those murderers’ lives and aims all came to naught.
Next, as to what thou said’st of thine own ease, .
Of thine own strait confinement and affairs ;

It was to keep my sons from evil deeds

That would recoil upon themselves. Ye were

Not straitly bound in prison, not misprized,

And had no harm to fear. I did not then

Treat you with scorn but held my treasury

At your disposal, acting as the Shahs

Had done before, not idly or without

A precedent. Chase, minstrelsy, and polo—

All that befitteth chiefs—were yours at will,

With hawks and cheetahs, jewels and dinars:
Your so called prison was a palace where

Ye lived in joy. I dreaded thee moreover
Through what the readers. of the stars had said.
That was the cause of thine imprisonment
That thou mightst do us naught of injury—

The very injury that thou art doing.

I never parted with thy horoscope

Till I had sealed and given it to Shirin.

When I had reigned for six and thirty years,

And thou past doubt amidst such pleasant days
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHIRWI) 17

Gav’st all the matter to the wind, although

Much time had passed o’er us, there came to thee
A letter out of Hindustan but not

Without my cognizance. The chief of Rajas
Sent us a letter, jewels, divers stuffs,

An Indian scimitar, white elephant,

And all that I could hope for in the world,

And with the scimitar was gold brocade

With all varieties of gems uncut.

To thee the letter was on painted silk ;

So when I saw the Indian script I called

An Indian scribe, a fluent, heedful speaker,

Who when he read the Indian Raja’s words

Wept for the letter ran: ‘ Live joyfully

For thou art worthy both of joy and realm,

And on the day of Dai in month Azar C. 2033
Thou wilt be king and ruler of the world.

Thy sire will reign for eight and thirty years,

For so the stars ordain. Good times will shine
Upon thee ; thou wilt don the crown of greatness.’
These words have been fulfilled to me to-day,

But we should wash not froin our hearts affection.
I was aware that fortune had decreed

That when thy throne had gained its brilliancy
Mine only portion would be toil and pain,

And that my bright day would be turned to gloom ;
But as I gave, had Faith, made friends, and loved
I did not lour by reason of that letter.

I gave it, having read it, to Shirin,

And pondered much upon it. In her keeping

Are both the letter and the horoscope,

And no one great or small is ware thereof.

If thou wouldst see it make request of her ;

Thou haply mayst regard it more or less.

I wot that seeing it thou wilt repent,

And seek to heal the past. For what thou said’st

VOLS Lx, B
C.

2034

18 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Of bonds and of imprisonments, and how

We have done others hurt, *tis this world’s way,
And that of former chiefs and kings of kings,

And if thou know’st it not speak with an archmage ;
He will enlighten thee thereon and tell thee :—

‘°Tis ill to keep God’s enemy alive.’

Those that were in our prison were mere divs
Complained of by the righteous. Neither bloodshed
Nor utter harshness ever was our trade.

I shut up criminals and did not hold

Of small account wrongs done by them to others ;
But now I hear that thou hast freed these men—
Men worse than dragons—and for this thou art

A sinner guilty both in word and deed

In God’s sight. Now that thou art lord be prudent,
And if thou know’st not how consult the wise.
Forgive not those that vex thee though thou hopest
For wealth through them, and’what can better bonds
For one in whom thou seest naught but harm ?

In talking of my wealth thou hast not shown

Good sense and wisdom. We have never asked

For more than toll and tax. When these were paid
If any were still rich, though men might say

That they were foes and miscreants of the seed

Of Ahriman, we thought of God and passed

Such matters lightly by. From Him I had

The crown and throne, and they have cost me dear.
The Maker of the world, the righteous Judge,

Hath willed this change of fortune. In the world
His will is paramount, so when He would

Our minishment we seek not for addition.

We sought to please our Judge, but by our toils
Have not evaded His apportionment,

And when He asketh me I will tell all.

That Questioner is wiser than thou art,

And one more potent in all good and ill.
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHIRWfI) 19

The miscreants that stand before thee now

_ Are not thy friends or kin, and what they say

Of me that also will they say of thee

Before thy foes. They are but slaves of gold

And silver: thou wilt find in them no helper.

They have possessed thy heart and there instilled

Kach fault of mine. Such words as these are not

In thy philosophy and will not profit

Those miscreants’ minds, but I have uttered them

Tor my foes’ sake that they who read this letter,

Writ in the ancient tongue, may know that lies

Lack lustre even from the mouths of Shahs.

"Twill be too a memorial in the world,

A consolation to the man of wisdom,

And after our decease whoe’er shall read

These words of ours will learn our policy.

I gathered armies from Bartas and Chin,

And everywhere appointed generals,

Then made attacks upon mine enemies

Till none dared raise his head. When they were
scattered :

Our treasuries were all filled. The whole land toiled

For us, and from the sea so many gems

Were brought us that the shipmen grew aweary.

Plain, sea, and mountain, all were mine. Now when

The treasury of drachms had been expended

The coffers were refilled with new dinars,

With precious stones and royal jewelry,

As well as clothes and implements of war,

And when our crown was twenty-six years old |

Our treasuries were rich with many gems.

I struck a new die for my drachms and turned

To joy and merriment. That year when I

Had ta’en account I found the total sum

Ten million of dinars. Paidawasis,1

1 See Vol. vii., p. 95 note.
20 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

In Persian reckoning, I spent and squandered.
Each purse contained twelve thousand in dinars,
And those thus spent were royal, while besides
The tribute and dinars from Hinditstan,

The realm of Rum and land of sorcerers ;
Besides from every province gifts and tribute
From all the sovereigns and potentates ;

Besides New Year and Autumn offerings,

The gifts of horses and of fair-faced slaves ;
Besides cuirasses, helmets, axes, swords,

Which every one sent to us liberally ;

Besides musk, camphor, sables, beaver-skins,
Red weasels’ and white wolves’, our subjects all
Set suchlike loads upon their beasts and sought
Our court in haste; none was recalcitrant.
Abundant toil of all sorts have we spent

To amass a treasure—one additional

To those known as Khuzra and as ’Arts,!
Reserved by me against an evil day.

We long discussed what name the hoard should have,
And in the end we called it Bad Awar.?

Thus in my six and twentieth year of reign
Heaven till the eight and thirtieth favoured me ;
My chieftains were all safe, my foes all quaked,
And now I hear that thou art sovereign—

An evil juncture this for all the world,

Which reft of pleasure must perforce be mute.
Thou wilt make earth calamitous,. fulfilled

With suffering and profitless. Moreover,

Those same injurious persons that surround thee,
And are the Light® of thy dark nights, will give
Thy throne up to the wind that thou mayst not
Enjoy the world. Were there with thee a sage,
So that thy darkened mind might be illumed,
Thou wouldst not do amiss in giving gifts

1 See Vol. viii., p. 406. anlids ® Urmuczd in text.
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHfiRWf) 21

So that thy wealth might reach the poor. My son,
Whose days are few, whose wisdom is but secant !
Solicitude will rob thy soul of joy.

This know, that these our treasures are thy stay ;
The opportunity is in thy grasp.

They are the appanage of royalty ;

A world that is all moneyless is lost.

A pauper Shah will be unjust, and he

Whose hand is empty hath no strength or worth.
Without the means of largess he by all

Will be declared a fraud and not a Shah.
Moreover, if thy riches reach thy foes,

And all the idols come to Brahmans’ hands,

The worshippers will turn from God, thy name
And fame be spurned. If thou art treasureless
Thou wilt not have an army, and thy subjects
Will hail thee not as Shah. The dog is good

At begging bread, but if thou fillest him

He threateneth thy life. Again, thou said’st
About my strategy that I have stationed

The troops along the roads, and blamest me
Through ignorance, not knowing gain from loss.
The answer is that by my toil I gathered C. 2036
My splendid treasures, captured foreign cities,
And shattered all my foes that we might sit
Without vexation, toil, or injury

In peace upon the pleasant throne. I scattered
My horse about the frontier, and (to show

The difference *twixt the worthless and the worthy)
When thou recall’st the troops from every side
The foe will see the road clear, for fran

Is like a garden in the jocund Spring,

Whose happy blossoms never fail to flower,

A garden of pomegranate and narcissus,

Of apples and of quince ; but when the orchard
Becometh void of men the enemy
22 THE SHAHNAMA OF. FIRDAUSI

Will root up all the marjoram and snap
All branches of pomegranate and of quince.
[rAn’s walls are its troops and gear of war,
Its thorns all arrows on its battlements,
And if in wantonness thou flingest down
The garden-wall the garden is as waste,
As sea or upland. Cast not down its wall
Or thou wilt break the [rdnians’ hearts and backs,
For then will raid and ravage, horsemen’s shouts,
And all the incidents of war ensue.
Expose not thou our children, wives, and land
To trouble: let but one such year elapse,
And sages will describe thee as a fool.
Now I have heard that thou dost give high place
To men unworthy. Know that Nushirwan,
Son of Kubad,! recorded in his Letter
Of Counsel that whoe’er doth give his arms
To foes doth give himself to slaughtering,
Sinee, when he asketh back those arms for use,
The enemy will fight. As for the message
Of Cesar, which hath made thee call me heartless,
And self-willed. thou recallest not the facts ;
Thy words were prompted by some counsellor.
As for my tyranny and his good faith,
Canst thou discern good faith from tyranny ?
Receive mine answer, thou of little wit !
But let me say withal, as is but right,
Thou art the plaintiff and the witness too—
A thing no man of wisdom would allow.
When Czesar washed off from his face the dust:
Of bale he chose me as his son-in-law
For valour’s sake. Whoever walketh not
The earth for ill, and hath some share of wisdom
Within him, knoweth that Bahram Chubina
Began the feud and that the frdnians

' Reading with P. and T. 2 See Vol. viil., p. 27.
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHIiRWI) 23

Took sides with him. The Ruimans did not triumph
O’er him; the drifting sand can not bind fast -

The mountain! But in that fight God vouchsafed
To aid me, and the armies of the world

Were naught to me. The [ranians have heard C. 2037
Of those events, and thou shouldst hear from them.
As for myself, I did whate’er I could,

Upon the day of fight, for Niyatus

With kindness and with magnanimity,

But have not reckoned that day’s recompense,

And Farrukhzdd will tell thee just the same :

Look not upon the world with boyish eyes.

Gashasp, who was our treasurer, can tell,

And that good archimage, our minister,

That I bestowed upon the Ruman troops

A hundred thousand purses from our treasures.

I gave to Niyatus a thousand nuggets,

With earrings and red gold. Each nugget’s weight
Was as a thousand treasury-miskals

I reckoned. I bestowed on him withal

Fine watered pearls that experts had found flawless,
And every one worth thirty thousand drachms

To jewellers, and five score noble steeds,

Selected from my stables—fifty saddled,

The others very choice, housed in brocade,

Mates for the wind upon the waste. I sent

All these to Cesar with my thanks withal.

For what thou said’st about the Cross of Christ,
That bit of old wood flung among my treasures—

A matter of no loss or gain to me—

Thou hast been listening to some Christian’s talk.

I mused that one like Cesar, great and mighty,
Surrounded as he is by learnéd men—

Philosophers and potentates and priests—

Should call one that was executed God!

While as for this dry, rotten wood, if this
(O-

2038

24 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Mere useless Cross were God “*twould be Urmuzd,
Whose name we give to every month’s first day,
And would have vanished from our treasury
As Christ himself departed from the world.
Again for what thou said’st : * Make thine excuse,
Amend thy conduct and ensue God’s path,’
I answer: ‘ May the two hands of Kubad,
His feet and lips and tongue rot! It was God
Who placed the crown upon my head: I took,
And revelled in the gift. I have returned it
Since He demanded it. What next I wonder ?
To Him will I confess, not to a boy
Searce able to distinguish good and ill.’
All that God doth is welcome unto me
Though I have seen much woe and bitterness.
For eight and thirty years have I been Shah,
And none among the kings hath been my peer.
He that bestowed this world on me may give
Another but will have no thanks of mine!
I will pronounce a blessing on the realm :—
‘May earth be ever teeming with the wise.’
So long as God shall help and succour us
None will dare curse.”

Then said he to Kharrad :—
‘“Q Memory of the great ones of the world!
Say to that foolish and impetuous boy :—
‘The lustre of our countenance is dimmed :
Farewell to thee for ever. As for me,
May all our converse be henceforth with sages.’
As for yourselves, illustrious messengers,
Ye Persians eloquent and eminent !
To both of you I also bid farewell.
Say nothing but the words that ye have heard.
I give my blessing to the world at large,
Which we have looked on as a passing thing.
All mother-born must die—whome’er thou hast
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHIRWI) 25

In mind—Khusrau Parwiz back to Kubad.

So too Hushang, Jamshid, and Tahmutras—

To all the world the founts of fear and hope—
Whom div and beast acknowledged, passed and died
When their day ended. Faridtin, the blest,

Who banned ill, close or open, from the world,
And stayed Zahhak the Arab’s hand from evil,
Seaped not by bravery the clutch of fate.

So was it with Arish whose arrow’s flight

Was one farsang ;!_ victorious Karan,

The capturer of cities; Kai Kubad,

Who having come from Mount Alburz became
Through manhood world-lord over all the folk,
And built himself a world-famed house of crystal,?
Adorned with lustrous pearls and gates of gems.
So was it with Kats, that man of might,

Who took the world by skill and policy,

He that adventured toward the sky above,
Unwitting of the processes of time ;

So too with Siyawush, that lion famed,

Who slew two tigers in his youthful days,4

And built Gang-dizh® with toil but gat therefrom
No treasure. Where are now Afrasiydab,

The Turkman king, whose semblance e’en in dream
None seeth; where Rustam, Zal, Asfandiyar,
Whose fame is their memorial with us ;

Gudarz and his choice sons, three score and ten,
Those cavaliers upon the riding-ground,

And lions of the fray; where Kai Khusrau,

The noble lion-man who in the fight

Made lions prisoners ; and Shah Gushtasp,

The convert to ‘ The Good Faith,’ he by whom

’ Much further according to the legend. See Vol. v., p. 12.

* This is attributed to Kai Katis elsewhere. See Vol. ii., pp. 81, 101.
* This line occurs three couplets too low in C.

‘ This is not mentioned elsewhere in the poem.

*See Vol. ii., pp. 189, 279.
Ce

2039

26 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Grace was renewed ; where went renowned Sikandar,

Who overturned the world, and where Jamasp,

Who shone in astrologic lore more brightly

Than Sol or Venus ? Where is that famed Shah,

Bahram Gtr, matchless in his strength and courage ?

No Shah was like him in munificence ;

The turning heaven dared not to touch his head.

Where is that Shah, my grandsire, bright of soul

Who ruled the world as KisrAé Nushirwan ?

Where are the seven and forty world-lords 71, Gone

Is all their work, gone are the Great and Wise,

The warrior-horsemen and the men of lore,

These passing those in prowess and those these

In years? They all have left this spacious world,

Left palace, hall, and riding-ground. Midst Shahs,

Though some were older far, I had no peer.

I walked the world for good and ill, and held

The evil day aloof. °’T'was mine to traverse

Full many a rugg¢éd path and sweep away

Full many a foe. My treasures fill all lands ;

Where earth and water are my toil is seen.

When with me too the world shall cease, and all

The nobles’ hopes grow dim, with my son also

The throne will not abide, for he will quit it,

And all his fortune end. What time the angel

That taketh souls approacheth I shall say :-—

‘Take my soul gently.’ I will clear my heart

By penitence, and freedom from offence

Shall be my breastplate. Well have men of wisdom,

Good, veteran, learned, declared: ‘ If wakeful fortune

Decline one must expect fears manifold,

And he whose day of greatness hath gone by
‘Khusrau Parwiz was only the forty-third Shah. Pcrhaps

some, who never became Shahs, such as Siy4wush and Asfandiyar,

are included, or it may be that the author of this defence (see p.

4) wrote from his own point of view, not that of the supposed
speaker.
N
“I

KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHiRW1)

Is foolish if he asketh its return.’
This is my message to the world, to mean
And mighty too: ere long the Shah and all
His famous troops will fall to slaughtering
Kach other and fling fire on field and fell ;
Then sires will fall by sons and sons by sires ;
Our enemies, the people that discoursed
Of evil deeds and chilling words, will pay
The smart when we are gone and not for long
Enjoy the world. Since rule and greatness end
With me what reck if Lion or another
Shall have the sway ?”
Ashtad and brave Kharrad,
Son of Barzin, those sages, when they heard
The message of that leader, were heart-pierced,
And smote their heads. Both sorrowed for their
words ;
They buffeted their faces, rent their robes C. 2040
In grief, and scattered dust upon their heads.
Those ancients fared forth from his presence, weeping,
In anguish, with their hearts all arrow-points.
With furrowed faces and in sore distress
They went before Shirwi and every whit
To that man. brainless and incompetent
Detailed the message that the Shah had sent.

§ 3

How Shirwt grieved for Khusrau Parwiz and how the
Chiefs were displeased thereat

Shirwi wept bitterly on hearing this ;
His heart quaked for the crown and throne, and when
The company dispersed that had dismayed him
Cc;

2041

28 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

With foul words clamouring for his father’s blood,
And burning the youth’s heart, he left the throne
Of kingship, clasped with honoured hands his head,
And wept blood on his breast. News of that weeping
And of the lamentation of the king,
Came to the host and all were in dismay.
They met, discussed Khusrau Parwiz, and cried :—
“Tf he shall sit upon the throne again
He will disgrace the captains of the host.”

Whenas the sun rose o’er the darksome hills
The malcontents awoke and went to court.
The Shah, on hearing of it, took his seat
Upon the throne, and those of high degree,
Akin or alien, approached the presence.
They took their seats with scowls but no one spoke.
The king said: ‘* Gibbeting is the desert
Of him that mourneth not my father’s woes.
I call such misbegotten and a knave.
Let none depend on such because that man
Is rottener than a rotten willow-tree.”’

He gat this answer from the men in fault :—
** Call whosoever saith: ‘I serve two Shahs ’
A fool at heart and vile whate’er his rank.”

Shirwi rejoined: ‘‘ For Shahs no wealth no troops !
For one month we will utter pleasant words,
And give no hint of duress to my sire ;
He may make statements that will gladden us
Because his treasures are in every coast.”

On hearing this they rose to seek their homes.
Then Shah Shirwi gave orders to the cooks :—
** Let nothing be denied Khusrau Parwiz :
Serve up his food upon a golden service,
And let the food itself be rich and grateful.”

The servers brought it but he would not eat
The viands that were proffered, hot or cold.
Shirin’s hand brought to him all that he ate
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHIRWI) — 29

Because she sorrowed with him in his grief.

She was his sole good friend and soothed his woes
Both day and night, shared all his hopes and fears,
And quaked for him like willow in the wind.

A month passed and meanwhile Khusrau Parwiz
Was full of pain and anguish night and day,

His faults and crimes recalled to memory,

And little relish of that life had he.

§ 4

How Barbad lamented Khusrau Parwiz, cut off his own
Fingers, and burned his Instruments of Music

Now list the lamentation of Barbad,?

And grow forgetful of the world at large.

On hearing that the Shah, not by advice

And ’gainst his will, no longer filled the throne,
That ‘‘ men are seeking how to murder him ;
The soldiers are renouncing fealty,”

Barbad came from Chahram to Taisaftin

With tearful eyes and heart o’ercharged ; he came
To that abode and saw the Shah whereat

His tulip-cheeks became like fenugreek.

He bode awhile in presence of the Shah,

Then went with wailing to the audience-hall.
His love flamed in his heart, his heart and soul
Burned in his anguish for Khusrau Parwiz ;

His eyes rained like a cloud in Spring and made
His bosom as the margent of the sea.

He fashioned him a dirge upon the harp,

And to that dirge he sang a mournful plaint.

‘For the story of Barbad see Vol. viil., p. 396 seq.
30 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSiI

With visage wan and heart fulfilled with grief
He thus lamented in the olden tongue :—-

““Q Shéh! O noble chieftain! O Khusrau!
O great! _O strong! O hero ne’er cast down !
Where are thy mastery and greatness now,
Where all thy Grace, thy fortune, and thy crown ?

‘* Where that imperial circlet, towering height ?
Where are thine armiets and thine ivory throne?
Where all thy manliness, thy Grace, and might,
Who ‘neath thy wings hadst this world for thine
own ?

‘*“Oh! whither are thy dames and minstrels gone,
Gate, audience-hall, and leaders of thy day,

The diadem and Kawa’s gonfalon,
And all the blue-steel falchions, where are they ?

‘* Where are the head, the crown that. loved it well—
Mate of the earrings and the throne of gold ?
Where are Shabdiz, his stirrups and his sell—-
The steed that ’neath thee ever caracol’d ?

** Where are thy helmet, head, and habergeon
All golden and compacted gem to gem,
Thy cavaliers in gold caparison,
Whose swords made enemies the sheaths for them?

‘** Where all the camels for thy progresses,

The golden litters and attendance rife,
Led steeds, white elephants, and dromedaries ?
Have one and all grown hopeless of thy life ?
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHiRW1I) 31

** Where are thy fluent tongue and courteous,
Thy heart, thy purpose, and thine ardent soul ?
Why reft of all art thou abandoned thus ?
Hast read of such a day in any roll ?

“Oh! trust not to this world whose remedy
Is weaker than its bane. *Twas thy desire
To have a son to aid and succour thee :
Now through the son the gyves are on the sire!

“It is by sons that kings obtain their might,
And are unblemished by time’s travailings ;
Yet ever as his sons increased in height
Both Grace and vigour failed the king of kings.

‘** None that shall lend an ear while men recall
The story of Khusrau Parwiz must dare

To trust the world. Account as ruined all
[ran and as the pards’ and lions’ lair.

** Of the Sasanian race the Shah was head—
One peerless in the sight of crown and state :
The foeman’s wishes are accomplishéd,
And, like fran, the race is desolate.

** No man possessed a larger host than he,
Yet who had eause for justice to beseech ?
The great protector brought the misery,
And now the wolves are making for the breach !

*“*Q Shah devoid of shame!’ thus tell Shirwi,
‘Such conduct is not worthy of this court.
Count not upon thy troops’ fidelity
When war is rife on all sides.” God support
C. 2043

32 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUStI

‘Thy soul, my master! and it is my prayer

That He thy foemen’s heads may headlong fling.
By God and by thy life, my king! I swear

By New Year’s Day, by sun, and jocund Spring,

“If eer this hand of mine again shall turn
To harping may no blessing light on me ;
Mine instruments of music will I burn
That I may ne’er behold thine enemy.”

He cut four fingers off and grasped the stumps
Within his other palm. Returning home

He kindled fire and burned his instruments,

While those about Kubad both day and night

At all that might befall them quaked with fright.

5

Sn

How the Chiefs demanded from Shirwit the Death of
Khusrau Parwtz and how he was slain by Mihr
Hurmuzd

Shirwi, a timid, inexperienced youth,

Found that the throne beneath him was a snare,
While readers of mankind saw that *twas time
For men of might. Those that had done the ill,
And had produced that coil, went from the hall
Of audience to the presence of Kubad

To mind him of their infamous designs :—

‘We said before and now we say again

Thy thoughts are not on government alone.
There are two Shahs now seated in one room,
One on the throne and one on its degree,
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHiRW1I) — 33

And when relations grow “twixt sire and son
They will behead the servants one and all.
It may not be, so speak of it no more.”
Shirwi was frightened and he played poltroon
Because in their hands he was as a slave.
He answered: ‘* None will bring him to the toils
Except a man whose name is infamous.
Ye must go homeward and advise thereon.
Inquire: ‘ What man is there that will abate
Our troubles secretly ?” ”
The Shah’s? ill-wishers
Sought for a murderer to murder him
By stealth, but none possessed the pluck or courage
To shed the blood of such a king and hang
A mountain round his own neck. Everywhere
The Shah’s foes sought until they met with one
Blue-eyed, pale-cheeked, his body parched and hairy,
With lips of lapis-lazuli, with feet
All dust, and belly ravenous; the head
Of that ill-doer was bare. None knew his name
Midst high and low. This villain (may he never
See jocund Paradise !) sought Farrukhzad,
And undertook the deed. ‘‘ This strife is mine,”
He said. ‘If ye will make it worth my while
This is my quarry.”
* Go and do it then
“If thou art able,” Farrukhzad replied.
** Moreover open not thy lips herein.
I have a purse full of dinars for thee,
And I will look upon thee as my son.”
He gave the man a dagger keen and bright, C. 2044
And then the murderer set forth in haste.
The miscreant, when he approached the Shah,
Saw him upon the throne, a slave attending.
Khusrau Parwiz quaked when he saw that man,
‘ Khusrau Parwiz.

VOL." 1x, Cc
34 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And shed tears from his eyelids on his cheeks
Beeause his heart bare witness that the day
Of heaviness was near. He cried: ‘“‘ O wretch !
What is thy name? Thy mother needs must wail
thee.
The man replied: ‘‘ They call me Mihr Hurmuzd,
A stranger here with neither friend nor mate.”
Thus said Khusrau Parwiz: ‘“ My time hath come,
And by the hand of an unworthy foe,
Whose face is not a man’s, whose love none seeketh.”
He bade a boy attending him: “ Go fetch,
My little guide ! an ewer, water, musk,
And ambergris, with cleaner, fairer robes.”
The boy-slave heard, unwitting what was meant,
And so the little servant went away,
And brought a golden ewer to the Shah
As well as garments and a bowl of water,
Whereon Khusrau Parwiz made haste to go,
Gazed on the sacred twigs and muttered prayers :
It was no time for words or private talk.
The Shah put on the garments brought, he made
Beneath his breath confession of his faults,
And wrapped a new simarre about his head
In order not to see his murderer’s face.
Then Mihr Hurmuzd, the dagger in his hand,
Made fast the door and coming quickly raised
The great king’s robe and pierced his liverstead.
Such is the process of this whirling world,
From thee its secret keeping closely furled !
The blameless speaker and the boastful see
That all its doings are but vanity,
For be thou wealthy or in evil case
This Wayside Inn is no abiding-place ;
Yet be offenceless and ensue right ways
If thou desirest to receive just praise.
When tidings reached the highways and bazars ;—

>
KUBAD (COMMONLY: CALLED SHIRWI) 35

** Khusrau Parwiz was slaughtered thus,” his foes

Went to the palace-prison of the sad,

Where fifteen of his noble sons were bound,

And slew them there, though innocent, what time

The fortune of the Shah was overthrown.

Shirwi, the world-lord, dared say naught and hid

His grief though he wept sorely at the news,

And afterwards sent twenty of his guards

To keep his brothers’ wives and children safe YC. 2045

Now that the Shah had been thus done to death. °
So passed that reign and mighty host away,

Its majesty, its manhood, and its sway

Such as no kings of kings possessed before,

Or heard of from the men renowned of yore.

It booteth nothing what the wise man saith

When once his head is in the dragon’s breath.

Call this world “ crocodile ”’ for it doth gnaw

The prey that it hath taken with its claw.

The work of Shah Khusrau Parwiz is done ;

His famous hoards and throne and host are gone.

To put one’s trust in this world is to be

In quest of dates upon a willow-tree.

Why err in such a fashion from the way

Alike by darksome night and shining day ?

Whate’er thy gains lét them suffice thee still

As thou art fain to save thy soul from ill,

And in thy day of strength hold thyself weak ;

For kindly impulses and justice seek,

And be intent on good. For what is thine

To give or spend do as thou dost incline ;

All else is pain and toil. How goodlier

Than we are friends whose faithfulness is clear !

Such faithfulness of friends is greatly dear.
C.

2046

36 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

§ 6

How Shirwi asked Shirin in Marriage, how Shirin
killed herself, and how Shirwi was slain

Since I have ended with Khusrau Parwiz
I speak next of Shirwi and of Shirin.

As soon as three and fifty days had passed
Since that whereon that glorious Shah was slain
Shirwi dispatched Shirin a messenger
To say: “ Thou wicked, potent sorceress,
Learned but in necromancy and black arts !

In all fran thou art the guiltiest.

By necromancy didst thou gain the Shah,

And by thy craft thou bringest down the moon.
Quake, guilty one! and come to me. Abide not
Thus in thy palace, joyful and secure.”

Shirin raged at his message and abuse
So foul and senseless. Thus she said: ‘“‘ God grant
That parricides possess not Grace or presence.

I will not see the wretch e’en from afar
At funeral or feast.”’
That mournful dame
Sent for a scribe and had a document
Drawn in the olden tongue, instructing him
Regarding her last wishes and estate.
She kept a little poison in a pyx;
She could not well procure it in the city.
She kept it on her, sewed a winding-sheet
To wrap her form—that cypress of the garden—
And then returned this answer to Shirwi :—
** Kxalted Shah, the wearer of the crown !
Now perish all thy words and perish too
The villain’s heart and spirit that hath heard
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHIRW!) 37

Of witcheraft save by name and joyed therein.
Had Shah Khusrau Parwiz been one to cheer
His soul with sorcery there would have been
A soreeress within his bower, and she
Had seen his face.t He kept me for his pleasure,
And when the dawn was peeping he was wont
To call me from the golden bower and joy
At sight of me. Shame on thee for such words !
Such knavish talk becometh not a king.
Remember God, the Giver of all good,
And utter not such words in others’ hearing.”’
They brought the answer to the Shah.  Shirwi
Raged ’gainst the guiltless dame? and said: ‘‘ Thou
needs
Must come. None is blood-thirstier than thou.
Come and behold my crown’s top. If it be
Magnifical then do it reverence.”
Shirin, on-hearing this, was full of pain ;
She writhed; her cheeks grew wan. She thus
replied :-— :
‘** T will not come to thee save in the presence
Of those wise men that are about thy court,
Men of experience and clerkly skill.”
Shirwi dispatched and summoned fifty men
Both wise and old, then sent one to Shirin,
To say: “ Arise and come. Enough of talk.”
Thereat she robed herself in blue and black,
And drew anear the Shah, approached apace
The Rosary of Revellers*—the spot
Wherein those fluent Persians were—and sat
Behind the great king’s curtain as became

1 Reading with P.

* So far as the charge of witchcraft was concerned. Shirin (Vol.
viil., p. 389) had murdered Maryam, Kubad’s mother.

>“ elle alla droit a la salle de féte de Schadegan.’’ Mohl or,
more strictly, Barbier de Meynard, who completed the translation
from §4 to the end of the poem.
C.

2047

38 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

The virtuous. He sent to her to say :—
‘Two months! of mourning for Khusrau Parwiz
Are o’er. Now be my wife that thou mayst take
Thy pleasure and avoid a mean estate.
I will maintain thee as my father did,
And e’en with more. respect and tenderness.”
Shirin replied: ‘* Let me be righted first,
And then my life shall be at thy dispose.
I will not hesitate in answering
The hest and purpose of thy glorious heart.”
Shirwi agreed to that fair dame’s request,
Whereat the noble lady raised her voice
Behind the royal curtains, saying: ‘“ O Shah!
Be happy and victorious. Thou said’st
That I was a bad woman and a witch,
Remote from purity, and rectitude.”
Shirwi replied: ‘‘ "T'was so, but generous folk
Do not take dudgeon at mere hastiness.”
Shirin addressed the other Persians present
Within the Rosary of Revellers,
And asked: ‘* What have ye seen in me of ill,’
Guile, folly, and dark ways ? For many a year
I was the mistress of [ran and helped
The Brave in everything. I ne’er ensued
Aught but the right ; fraud and deceit I banned.
Through my word many were made governors,
And took their portions of the world full oft.
Who hath beheld my shadow in [ran
Away from home ? If any one hath marked >
My shadow, crown, and state let such declare
What he hath seen or heard and by ‘his answer
Reveal the truth.”
The magnates in attendance
All spake her fair. ‘“‘ In all the world,” they said,
*“ She hath no peer in public and in private.”

1 Reading with P.
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHIRWf) 39

Shirin proceeded thus: ‘* Ye lords and chiefs
Both veteran and redoubted ! three things make
The worth of women that bedeck the throne
Of greatness : one is modesty and wealth
Wherewith her husband may adorn his house ;
The next is bearing blesséd sons, that she
May e’en exceed her spouse in happiness ;

The third is having beauty and fine form,
Joined with the love of a sequestered life.
When I was mated to Khusrau Parwiz,
And entered on-seclusion, he had come
Weak and dispirited from Rum to live
Within our land, but after reached such power
As none had heard of or had looked upon.
Moreover I have had four sons by him

To his great joy—Nastur, Shahryar, Fartd,
And Mardanshah, blue heaven’s coronal.
Jamshid and Faridtin had not such sons ;
May my tongue perish if I lie herein !
Their bodies all are now beneath the dust,
Their spirits roaming in pure Paradise.”

Unveiling then her lovely countenance,

And musky hair, “‘ There is my face,” she added,
“Such as it is. If there be falsehood show it.
My hair was all my hidden excellence,

For none on earth e’er used to look thereon.
What I display is all my sorcery,

Not necromancy, fraud, and evil bent.”

None had beheld her hair before, no chief C. 2048
Had heard thereof. The elders were astound,
And their mouths watered. When Shirwi beheld
The visage of Shirin his spirit flew
Unmarked away from him. Her face so dazed him
That love of her filled all his heart. He cried :—
‘“*T want none but thyself. If I have thee
For wife [ran can give me nothing more.
40 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

I will not go from thy commands, but limn
My loyalty to thee upon mine eyes.”
The lady of the lovely face replied :—
““T still need somewhat of the [franian king.
I have two wants if thou wilt bid me speak,
And may thy king of kingship last for ever.”
Shirwi replied: ‘‘ My soul is thine, thy wish,
Whate’er it be, is granted.”
Said Shirin :-—
‘* All treasures laid up by me in this land
Thou shalt assign me as mine own before
This noble company and write thyself
Upon this roll that thou renouncest all,
Both small and great.”
Shirwi made haste to do
Her bidding. Having gained her wish she quitted
The Rosary of Revellers, the chiefs
And noble Persians, went home, freed her slaves,
And made them happy with that wealth of hers
Whereof she gave a part to mendicants,
And to her family a larger share.
She gave too somewhat to the Fanes of Fire,
The feasts of New Year’s Day and Mihr and Sada,
To ruined homes and caravansarais
Then turned to lions’ lairs. All this she gave
As offerings from Khusrau Parwiz, the world-lord,
And joyed his soul thereby. She sought the garden
And taking off her veil sat unadorned
Upon the ground and summoning her folk
Assigned with courtesy a place to each,
Then cried thus loudly: ‘“‘ Hear, ye unagegrieved !
For none will ever see my face again.
Fear ye the Judge of those that seek for justice,
The Lighter of the sun and moon and stars,
And speak but truth ; deceit is not for sages.
Since first I came before Khusrau Parwiz,
KUBAD (COMMONLY CALLED SHfRWf) 41

First made mine entry to his golden bower,
And was chief wife and Glory of the Shah,
Hath any fault at all appeared in me ?
There is no need to speak to save my face :
What booteth that to woman in her need ? ”
All rose to make reply: ‘‘ Famed dame of dames, — . 2049
So eloquent and wise and bright of soul!
By God! none ever saw thee, ever heard
Thy voice behind the curtains. Verily
Thy like hath sat not on the goodly throne
Since Shah Hushang.”’
Then all the servitors,
Slaves emulous and vigilant of heart,
Exclaimed : “* Exalted lady praised in Chin,
In Rim and in Tardz! who would presume
To speak aught ill of thee ? Could evil-doing
Befit that face of thine ?”
Thus said Shirin :-—
“ This reprobate, whom heaven above will curse,
Slew his own sire to compass crown and throne,
And may he never more see fortune’s face !
Hath he himself shut death out by a wall
Who lightly recked thus of a father’s blood ?
He sent a message to me that bedimmed
Mine own shrewd soul. I answered: ‘ While I live
My heart shall serve my Maker.’ I declared
My purpose fully, fearful of my foe:
He may defame me publicly when dead.
Ye are free agents and my slaves no longer.”
They wept much at her words and furthermore
Consumed with anguish for Khusrau Parwiz.
Informants went before the Shah and told
What they had heard about that guiltless dame.
He asked: ‘‘ Hath that good lady further wishes ? ”’
She sent to say: “‘ I have one wish, no more :
I fain would ope the late Shah’s charnel-house ;
C2050

42 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

I have a great desire to look on him.”

Shirwi replied: ‘‘ So do, *tis natural.”
The keeper oped the door. That pious lady
Began her wailing, went and laid her face
Upon the visage of Khusrau Parwiz,
Spake of the past and took the mortal bane :!
She sent the dust up from her own sweet life.
She sat beside the Shah with visage veiled,
Clad in a single camphor-scented robe ;
She set her back against the wall and died ;
She died and won the plaudits of the world.
Shirwi fell sick when he had heard the news,
For such a spectacle affrighted him.
He bade construct another sepulchre,
And make her diadem of musk and camphor.
He shut the old Shah’s charnel. Soon they gave
Shirwi the bane; the world had had its fill
Of Shahs! Thus luckless both in birth and death
He left the throne of kingship to his son.
One reigneth seven months and in the eighth
Doth don the camphor crown! Of earth’s good things
To have possession of the throne is best,
Of evils life cut short is evilest.

1.Gf.-p: 30.
XLV
ARDSHIR, SON OF SHIRWI

HE REIGNED SIX MONTHS

ARGUMENT

Ardshir’s accession is well received by the people. He
makes Pirtz, son of Khusrau, the captain of the host. Gurdz,
on the pretext of avenging Khusrau Parwiz, but really with
the intention of seizing the kingship for himsclf, schemes to
bring about the death of the Shah who is murdered at a
banquet by Pirtz.

NOTE

Ardshir (Artaxerxes III., September, A.D. 628—April,
A.D. 630) was, according to Tabari, only seven years old
at his accession. By some accounts he was only one year
old at the time. He was of course a mere. puppet in the
hands of the nobles. The ‘‘ True Cross,” if the date of its
elevation at Jerusalem—Sept. 14th, A. D. 629—be correct,
must have been restored during his reign.2

§1. The Arabic Tabari says that hie realm was administered
by Mih-Azar-Gushnasp (Mihr ’Hasis in the Persian version),
the High Steward, who had charge of the Shah’s person.
This may account for his being made out.to be a regicide in
the Shahnama. He really seems to have been a well-inten-
tioned man who did his best in very difficult circumstances.
At all events, according to the Persian Tabari,’ Shahrbaraz,
after taking possession of Ctesiphon, slew’ him and_ other
nobles on the pretext of avenging the death of Khusrau
Parwiz.

UN pagoo. Zin l..) S47. * NT, p. 392 note.
43
44 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

§2. It appears that Shahrbaraz (Guraz) was not con-
sulted when Ardshir was raised to the throne, and he made
this an excuse for taking violent measures. The occasion
was a favourable one for an ambitious general in command
of an army. Moreover, he had an understanding, confirmed
by matrimonial alliances, with Heraclius, who no doubt
promised to recognise him if he became Shah. He accordingly
marched upon Ctesiphon with 6,000 or, according to another
account, 60,000 troops. The High Steward made an attempt
at resistance, but Shahrbaraz with the connivance of the
captain of the guard and other chiefs was successful and the
usual scenes of outrage and massacre ensued.!

§1

How Ardshir, Son of Shirwi, ascended the Throne and
harangued the Chiefs

Now as the next confronting me I voice
The reign of Shah Ardshir, I have no choice.
When Shah Ardshir sat on the throne both young
And old flocked to him from Iran, for many
Were chiefs grown old, to hear what he would say.?
The young Ardshir then loosed his tongue and thus
He spake: ‘‘ Ye well-tried warriors! may one,
Whoe’er he be, that sitteth on the seat
Of sovereignty possess an open mind,
And worship God. We will ensue the course
Of former Shahs, ensue too Grace and Faith.
May we remember God who giveth good,
May all our acts be just! I will advance
The pious and make tyrants bleed. I trust
The army to Pirtiz, son of Khusrau,
Who loveth equity and loyal lieges.

' For the above see Id., p. 386 and notes. ZT, ii., 347. RSM, p. 541
* Couplet omitted.
ARDSHIR, SON OF. SHiRwI 45

They for their part with such a paladin
Still will be happy and serene of soul.”

Full many were contented with his speech ;
A peaceful ruler was the wish of each.

§2

How Gurdz was displeased at Ardshir being Shah and
how he caused Ardshir to be slain by Piruiz, Son of

Khusrau

Then tidings reached Guraz, who had involved
Khusrau Parwiz in sorrow and distress,

And he dispatched from Rim a man to say :—
* The crown of vile Shirwi is in the dust.

Hell take his soul and be his charnel-house C. 2051
O’erturned ! Who ever knew a lofty cypress
Wrecked in the garden by the grass, and one
Like to Khusrau Parwiz, whose peer as king
Time’s eye and heart perceive not, who bestowed
My greatness on me, and I have not turned
From his behest ? Now fate dethroneth him,
And fortune’s face is utterly averse ;

The circling heaven is his foe and maketh

His portion to be hidden in the earth ;

The sun and moon amerce him of his sway,

And take the crown and throne from such a king,
Bestow the sovereignty upon Shirwi,

And give up all fran to wretchedness !

When he passed and Ardshir assumed the crown
Both young and old rejoiced in him, but I,

If I have any portion in fran,

Will suffer not our country’s air to breathe
46 THE SHAHNAMA ‘OF FIRDAUSI

Upon him. Have I not received the news
Of Shah Khusrau Parwiz wrecked by the words
Of one of evil mark ? I will not have
A king like this one though the age be Shahless,
For there is much contention in his head,
And he adviseth with another host.
Now will I come in force with chosen chiefs
Of Rum and of fran, and we shall see
What sort of Head that is to whom such schemes
Appeal. I will uproot him so that never
Shall he’ name kingship more.”
He sent a runner

To seek the ancients of the Iranian host,
And strove in other fashion to advance
His ill designs by writing to Piruz,
Son of Khusrau, thus: ‘* The Sasdanians’ fortune
Is louring and we need a world-aspirant
To gird himself for action. Haply thou
Art ware of what to do and how to take
The needful steps, wilt seek for many helpers,
Both young and old, wilt’ clear away Ardshir,
And afterwards attain thy whole desire,
Be safe and well contented ; but if thou
Reveal this plot, and feed the sword of war
With blood, I will-lead forth such hosts from Rim
That I shall make the world dark in thine eyes.’
Heed well my words; and mayst thou think no scorn.
Of mine intent ; thou must not fall through folly.’
Oh! pass not from the throne of majesty
To underneath the dust. Repentance then
Will not avail thee when in wreak my sword
Is reaping heads.”

Pirtz, son of Khusrau,
When he had read that letter and perceived
The whole intendment of that self-willed man,
Much pondered on the matter and consulted
ARDSHIR, SON OF SHirwt 47

The ancient magnates, saying: ‘* This affair
Hath come upon me unawares and like
A revelation !”’
This was their reply :—
“ Famed and redoubted chieftain ! if our Shah
Shall perish we shall rightly perish too
For such a crime. Let not Guraz’ words move thee
To perpetrate such ill, but take oceasion
For doing good. Write him a fitting answer,
And wake him from his dream. Say: ‘ Thwart not
thou
God’s purposes ; give not the Div a way
To thine own heart. Reflect upon the case
Of Shah Khusrau Parwiz and all the wrong
That led to his undoing, for what time
Thou didst depose him the Sdsdnian fortune
Went at one blow, and when Shirwi ascended
The royal throne and girt his kingly loins
Folk hoped such days as when Khusrau Parwiz
Was Shah whose wits were keen in all regards,
And if the world became what it became,
And gat no profit from the state of things,
It was because the world dealt foolishly,
And by one stroke lost its advantages.
Now that Ardshir, succeeding to Kubad,
Is seated as the Shah upon the throne,
The world rejoicing in his majesty,
And earth and time exulting in his Grace,
Why should the world, now tranquil, he convulsed
By pain and war ? Knock not at evils’ door ;
Those that slay blameless kings will prosper not.
In this strife circling heaven must not raise
[ran in dust. I fear that God will end
The franians’ term for ills more heinous still? ”
Pirtiz, on this wise counselled, wrote Guraz—
That villain of vile race (may none like him
48 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Be ever chief !) —a profitable letter,
And thou hadst said that one had got his heart
Between the shears when he had read those words.
In fierce wrath with Piruz, son of Khusrau,
He gathered all his baggage and commanded
The host to march forth plainwards. At the news
Pirtiz dispatched a cameleer to go
In all haste to Tukhar to summon him,
Informing him at large of the affair,
Of what Guraz was doing and the strife
About the imperial throne. Then from Tukhar
This answer reached Pirtz, son of Khusrau :—
‘“* Risk not the blood of the [rdnian chiefs,
O noble man! but hear what saith Guraz.
Since thou hast written on such wise perchance
Tle may not come to fight with thee.”

Now when
Pirtz, son of Khusrau, had seen that letter
His heart had no repose from evil thoughts,
But gloomed with thinking how to harm the Shah,
Whose wont it was to summon him, for he
Was an observant man and eloquent,
And served as minister and treasurer.
He came one dark night for an audience,
And found the wine bright and the welcome warm.
Ardshir was seated in his palace-hall
In company with many young and old,
And when Pirtiz, son of Khusrau, came raised,
Thou wouldst have said, his head to heaven, called
For harp, and all the hall was filled with music.
Piriz, son of Khusrau, when midnight came,
Had drunk one man! of wine while the companions
Of Shah Ardshir were all bemused ; no minstrel
Was left that kept his wits. The miscreant
Dismissed the company: he and the Shah

1 See Vol. i., p. 290 note.
ARDSHIR, SON OF SHirwti 49

Alone remained. That man of outrage rose,
Laid hand upon the Shah’s lips unawares,
And held it there until Ardshir was dead.
The palace filled with scimitars and arrows.
All there—ambitious youths and warriors—
Were fautors of Pirtiz, son of Khusrau.
Upon this manner ceased Ardshir to be
When he had had six months of sovereignty.

VOL. IX D
XLVI
GURAZ (ALSO CALLED FARAYIN)

HE REIGNED FIFTY DAYS

ARGUMENT

Guradz, hearing of Ardshfr’s death, marches on Taisaftin and
urged on by his younger, though dissuaded by his elder son,
usurps the throne. His rule described. A plot is formed
against him and he is slain while returning from the chase.
The throne remains vacant for a while.

NOTE

C/. note to previous reign. Gurdz (Shahr-Barz, April
27th—June 9th, A.D. 630) reigned for forty days. He was
one of the three chief cenerals - employed by Khusrau Parwiz
in his long war against the Eastern Roman Empire. His
real name, according to Tabarf, was Farruban. This in
Pahlavi would be Farrukhan, which by a misreading has
become Fardyin in the Shdhnama. Shahrbaraz (Shahrguraz,
or Shahrwaraz) is, says Tabari, a title. Firdausi uses the
shortened form Gurdz, which means ‘ boar,” because it
is more convenient metrically. The title may have been
appropriate enough. In the Shdhndma the general is split
up into two personalities—Guraz or Farayin, the usurper,
and Shahrangurdz, the avenger of the breach made by the
upstart in the sacred line of Sdsd4nian succession.2 In Tabari
the leader of the revolt is a native of Istakhr named Pusfar-
rukh.? Shahranguréz in the Shahndma is also of the same
clty.

, p. 390 and vole. * Id. pp. 292 and note. 388 and note. ‘Id.
50
GURAZ (ALSO CALLED FARAYIN) 51

$1

How Gurdz (also called Fardyin) received News of the
Slaying of Ardshir, hastened to Iran, took Pos-
session of the Throne, and was killed by Shahran-
gurdaz

Piruz, son of Khusrau, dispatched a post,

And letter too, in secret to Guraz,

Whose sombre soul, what time the messenger

Arrived, grew like the sun, and from those parts

He led forth such an army that the way

Was barred to fly and emmet. Like the wind

He sped to Taisaftin, his soldiers’ hands

All had been bathed in blood. When he arrived

The chiefs went out to welcome him, but none

Among the troops dared breathe for they were few. —C. 2054

Guraz, on entering the city, stayed not

For minister and counsellor but chose

A void place, and the magnates privily

Conferred with him. Pirtiz, son of Khusrau,

Set loose his tongue and said: ‘‘ Famed paladin !

Whom hast thou chosen to be king of kings,

And illustrate the crown of majesty ?”

The warrior Gurdz made answer thus :—

‘“‘T have not any secrets from fran.

To-morrow look ye out for some new Shah

To sit like some new moon upon the throne.” >

Since knowledge is the glory of a man

Walk not, if thou canst help it, foolishly.

He that hath wisdom speaketh goodly words,

And as it groweth he deserteth ill.
52 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

It is the best of man’s accomplishments,
The world’s endeavour and the way of God.
Of things that grace one not there is no need
To speak at large for he will foolishly
Disgrace himself howe’er he may exalt
The case in point. When wisdom hath deserted
The head, and shame the eye, fame and disgrace,
And cold and hot, are one—no terror this
To any coward whether quick or dead.
Make, if thou canst, all good thy business
Because the world abideth not with any.
Let all thy usance be humanity,
Munificence and uprightness thy Faith.

When Farayin assumed the royal crown
He uttered what was in his mind and said :—
‘* Let me assume the kingship for a while,
And sit upon the throne of gold in Joy.
Far better scatter wealth and be exalted
Than purchase sixty years of servitude.
Thus will I sit a while in sovereignty,
Arrayed in satin? and in painted silk,
And after me my son shall take my throne,
Assume this royal crown, be king as was
His sire, and be exalted and renowned.
Whoe’er shall minister to our delight
Shall be a happy man among mankind.
In feast-time we will drink with joyful hearts,
In war-time we will hunt our enemies.”

His elder son said privily to him :—
‘* Who of us, father! ever wore the crown ?
Feel not secure, take means to compass wealth ;
Thou wast the world’s protector ; keep to that.
If any member of the royal race
Shalt come thou wilt not long be here; thy heart
Will keep of kingship only grief and pain ;

 

1 Or “‘ beaver-skins,”’
GURAZ (ALSO CALLED FARAYIN) 53

Thou wilt be wretched, destitute, and wan.”’
Then said the younger son: ‘* Thou hast become C. 2055
Crowned in the world and hast both troops and
treasures
Befitting royalty, but treasureless
Wilt have to labour still. What ancestor
Of Faridtin, who had Abtin to sire,
K’er wore the crown ? Hold fast the world by courage
And treasure. Nobody is born a king.”’}
The younger’s words pleased Farayin the best,
Who bade his elder son: ** Be not so raw.”
He laid out in the royal offices
The muster-roll and called all troops to court.
He gave drachms night and day and many robes
Of honour ill-deserved. Within two weeks
Of all the treasury of Shah Ardshir
Remained not what would buy an arrow’s plume !
Whene’er Guraz would go forth to the pleasance
The lights were torches made of ambergris, °
Four score before and four score after him :
Behind them came his friends and partisans.
Of gold and silver were the goblets all,
The golden gem-encrusted.” “T'was his use
To feast all night. The nobles’ hearts were full
Of vengeance on him. °*Twas his wont to roam
A-nights the gardens and the riding-ground.
Save but to sleep and wake, to eat and plunder,
That slight, weak-witted one knew naught. He went
Drunk ever to repose and with a sash
From Chin about his head. The troops were all
Vexed to the heart at him while all the province
Was full of turmoil and distress. He lost
All trace of generosity and grew
Unjust, unfortunate, and good for naught.
The world was wrecked by his iniquity,

MBit Cf.oVOl. svi, Pr .gzor * The above couplets transposed.
54 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And at his handling people smote their heads.
He shed the bloed of innocents until
The troops grew wroth with him. He used to shut
His eyes for gold and would have sold the world
To win dinars. Folk cursed him. All desired
His death and meeting privily discussed
His deeds. Hurmuzd Shahranguraz, a horseman
Redoubted of the city of Istakhr—
The glory of the chieftains—thus addressed
One night the [ranians secretly : ‘‘ Ye chiefs !
The time of Fardyin is proving grievous ;
He holdeth all the chiefs in light esteem.
Why have your brains and hearts become thus
straitened ?

Through him all eyes are tearful, livers charged
With blood. Is no physician to be found ?
He is not royal or Sasanian ;
Why gird the loins before him ? Of a truth
Your hearts have flown out of your breasts or else
Your pluck hath disappeared ! ”

The folk replied :—
** Since there was no one left fit for the throne
None is inspired by jealousy to take
This base-born’s heart away ; but we adopt
Thy counsel. Tell us from thy stores of lore
How to release fran from this insane
And hot-brained Shah ill both in word and deed.
May he be never blessed ! ”’

Shahranguraz
Replied: ‘‘ The Iranians have suffered long.
If ye will harm me not but play the Persian
K’en now by holy God’s aid will I bring him
Down from his throne to dust.”

He gat this answer :—

‘** May no harm come to thee! All we the host
To-day are thy supporters and thy stronghold
GURAZ (ALSO CALLED FARAYIN) 55

If ill herefrom befall thee.”

Hearing this
That royal warrior sought how to set
Hands on the worthless Shah. Now he one day
Took order and departed from the city
To hunt, and of the franians a troop
Of lords and lieges fared, escorting him.
He urged his courser on and rode about
As *twere Azargashasp, the cavaliers
KEncircling him and beating up the game.
Now at what time they turned back city-wards
Shahranguraz looked at the hapless Shah
With boldness, chose an arrow from his quiver,
One that was straight and had a point of steel,
And urged his black steed while the host looked on.
He stretched the bow and drew it out at whiles
To chest or head, then notched, as if in sport,
An arrow on the string and drew the bow
Till it concealed the point, and loosed his thumb.
Forthwith the shaft struck on the monarch’s back,
Who dropped his whip. The arrow was all blood
Up to the feathers and the iron head
Protruded from his navel. All the troops
Unsheathed and all that night while dust-clouds rose
They plied their swords and knew not whom they

fought,

But took and gave back blows and cursed or blessed
That deed. Now when the yellow Veil appeared,
So that the world seemed like a leopard’s back,
There was a multitude of slain and maimed,
And cavaliers and leaders were astound.
That great host was dispersed like timid sheep C. 2057
When they perceive a wolf. Long they remained
Without a king: none cared to claim the crown.
For long they sought and sought in vain to trace
Some royal scion of the noble race.
XLVII
PURANDUKHT

SHE REIGNED SIX MONTHS

NOTE

Putrandukht (Puranducht, summer A.D. 630—autumn
A.D. 631), reigned, according to Tabari, for one year and
four months. Her name, it appears, should be spelt with a
B, not with a P. She is said to have restored the ‘“ True
Cross,” but it seems more probable that this was done in the
reign of Ardshir. She made the leader of the successful
conspiracy against Shahrbaraz her prime minister.1 She
was the first historical female Shah and it was in allusion to
her reign and that of her sister Azarmdukht that the distich
is quoted in Mir Khand :—

‘““ No dignity remains in a household
In which the hens are crowing like cocks.”

§1
How Pirdndukht ascended the Throne and slew Piriiz,
Son of Khusrau, and how her own Life ended

"Tis but crude policy when women rule,
}
But yet there was a lady—Putrandukht—
Surviving of the lineage of Sasan,
‘For the above see NT, p. 390 seq. and notes, ZT, i1., 349.
<RM, Pt IL; vol: ii pe Lor
56
PURANDUKHT 57

And well read in the royal volume : her
They seated on the throne of sovereignty,
The Great strewed jewels over her, and then
She spake upon this wise: ‘* I will not have
The people scattered, and I will enrich
The poor with treasure that they may not bide
In their distress. God grant that in the world
There may be none aggrieved because his pain
Is my calamity. I will expel
Foes from the realm and walk in royal ways.”
She made search for Pirtiz, son of Khusrau,
Who was delated by an alien,
Whereat she chose some warriors from the host
Who brought Pirtiz before her. She exclaimed :—
** Foul-purposed miscreant !? thou shalt receive,
As infamous, the guerdon for thy deeds.”
She bade bring from the stalls a colt unbroken,
And bound, firm as a rock, Pirtiz thereto
Without a saddle and with yoke on neck.
The vengeful lady had that untamed steed
Brought to the riding-ground and thither sent,
With lassos coiled up in their saddle-straps,
A band of warriors to urge the colt
To utmost speed, to strive from time to time
To throw Pirtz and ever roll itself
Upon the ground. That colt won much applause
Until with skin in shreds and dripping blood
Pirtiz gave up the ghost right wretchedly. C. 2058
Why having done wrong seekest thou for justice ?
Nay, ill for ill; that is the course of right.
Purandukht ruled the world with gentleness ;
No wind from heaven blew upon the dust,
But when six months had passed beneath her sway
The circle of her life bent suddenly ;
For one week she was ailing, then expired,

+ Through misgovernment. * One couplet omitted
58 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And took away with her a fair renown.

Such is the process of the turning sky,
So potent while so impotent are we !

If thine be opulence or poverty,

If life affordeth gain or loss to thee,

If thou shalt win what thou desirest so,
Or disappointed be in wretchedness,

And whether thou be one of wealth or woe,
Both woe and wealth will pass away no less.
Reign as a Shah a thousand years, five score,
For sixty years or thirty, ten or four,

It cometh to one thing, when all is done,

If thou hadst many years or barely one.

Oh! may thine actions thine own comrades be,
For they in every place will succour thee.

Let go thy clutch upon this Wayside Inn
Because a goodlier place is thine to win.

If thine endeavour be to learning given

Thou wilt by knowledge roam revolving heaven.
XLVIII
AZARMDUKHT

SHE REIGNED FOUR MONTHS

NOTE

Before Azarmdukht (Azermidocht, end of A.D. 631—
beginning of A.D. 632) came to the throne there seems to
have been a short interval during which a distant scion of the
royal House, who took the name of Pirtz, ruled for less than a
month. The chief noble of the time, who was governor of
Khurdsan, wished to make Azarmdukht his wife on which she
had him privately executed. This noble’s son was the Rustam
that fought and fell at Kadisfya some years later. On
hearing of his father’s fate Rustam, who was in temporary
authority i in Khurdsan, marched with a great army against
Azarmdukht, ov erthrew her and put her “to death after she
had reigned six months. Her name probably means ‘“‘ modest
girl,”?}

$1
How Azarmdukht ascended the Throne and how she died

There was another dame hight Azarmdukht,
Who had fruition of the crown of greatness.
She came, sat down upon the royal throne,
And made herself the mistress of the world.
Her first words were: “ O sages, veterans,
And masters of affairs! be just in all,

1 For the above see NT, p. 393 and notes, ZT, 1, 350 seq.

De)
C.

2059

60 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And follow precedent, for ye hereafter
Must make the bricks your pillow. I will foster
The loyal liege, assist him with dinars,
And if he erreth be longsuffering ;
But him that is disloyal and deserteth
The way of wisdom and of precedent
Will I suspend in shame upon the gibbet,
Be he an Arab, Ruiman cavalier,
Or Persian thane.”
She filled the throne four months,
But with the fifth disaster came thereto,
For she too died, the throne had not a Shah,
But was the plaything of the ill-disposed.
With the revolving sky ’tis everything
To be all vengeful with its fosterling.
XLIX
FARRUKHZAD

HE REIGNED ONE MONTH

NOTE

Between, and even carlier than, the death of Azarmdukht
and the accession of Yazdagird III., the order of the dynastic
succession becomes very confused. The names of the Shahs
vary iv the different lists. The reason is that it was a period
of great internal unrest and various aspirants to the throne
held contemporaneously some short-lived authority in different
provinces of the empire. One of these princes, Farrukhzad
(farrukhzid-Khusrau) has received the honour of being
included in the list of the Shahs as recorded in the Shahnama.
Two accounts of the length of his reign are given in Tabari.
According to one, it lasted for six months, according to the
other, for a year. Both agree that he did not die a natural
death, and one of them states that his death was instigated
by the adherents of Yazdagird.4

1

How Farrukizdd ascended the Throne and how he was
slain by a Slave

Then from Jahram they summoned Farrukhzad,
And seated him upon the throne of kingship.
There with a pious soul he praised the Maker,

1NT, p. 397 and note. Cf, RSM, p. 544.
61
C.

2060

62 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And said: ‘‘ Son of the kings of kings am I,
And would have naught but quiet in the world.
The mischief-maker shall not be exalted
While I am Shah, but him that from his heart
Ensueth right, and is not mischievous,
Will I hold dear as my pure soul, and seek not
To harm the harmless. Him that beareth toil
On our behalf we will reward with treasure.
We will hold dear all friends and raise the fame
Of chieftains everywhere, but all my subjects,
Both friends and enemies, are safe with me.”

The troops all blessed him: “ Ne’er may earth and

time
Lack thee.’”?’ Yet when his throne was one month old
The head of all his fortune came to dust.
He had a slave, a cypress-tree in stature,
Fair, lusty, and well-liking. That knave’s name
Was Siyah Chashm.! May heaven ne’er bring his
like !

The Shah too had a handmaid whom he loved.
She chanced on Sivah Chashm all unawares
One day, who sent to say: “ If thou wilt meet me
At such a place thou shalt have endless gifts,
And I will deck thy crown with jewelry.”

The handmaid heard, made no reply, but went
And told the thing to Farrukhzad who raged,
And could not eat or sleep in his concern.
He put the feet of Siyah Chashm in fetters,
And cast him into prison. When the knave
Had been confined awhile the Shah released him,
For many pled for him. The slave returned
To serve the Shah and cut his lifetime short,
For just as such a bad malignant slave
Would do he sought revenge upon the Shah,
And seizing on a time when Farrukhzad

1 Black-eyed.
FARRUKHZAD 63

Reposed himself put poisen in the wine.
The Shah drank, lived one week, and all that heard
About his fate lamented him. The kingship
Was in extremities and foes appeared
On every side. The throne of king of kings,
Through these ill doings of the franians,
Was overturned.
Of such a fashion are
Time’s revolutions! Let it be thy care
To gather for thyself therefrom thy share.
Eat what thou hast and trust the morrow not,
For it may hold for thee a different lot :
To give to others it may take from thee.
Thou ecallest this a world and verily
It doth whirl! So enjoy thine own, let go
The surplusage that thou hast toiled for so
To other folk but never to thy foe,
Klse whensoe’er thy day is overpast
Thy hoards will be as is the desert-blast,
Thy treasures all become thine enemy’s ;
So give away to set thy mind at ease.
L
YAZDAGIRD

HE REIGNED TWENTY YEARS

ARGUMENT

Yazdagird becomes Shah. The country is invaded by the
Arabs. He sends Rustam, the captain of the host, to oppose
them. Rustam takes a despondent view of the situation,
and after some attempt at negotiations is defeated by the Arabs
at Kadisiya and slain. The war continues, and Yazdagird
withdraws to Khuradsin to get help from Mahwi of Sur, the
governor. Mahwi plots with Bizhan, a Turkish prince,
against Yazdagird, who is betrayed in battle and takes refuge
in a mill, where he is slain by the miller at the bidding of
Mahwi. Mahwi assumes the crown, makes war on Bizhan,
is taken prisoner, and put to death. The poem ends with a
brief passage, in which Firdausi gives some account of the
completion of his undertaking, of help afforded him and of
discouragements undergone, and concludes with a well founded
assurance of his own future fame.

NOTE

Yazdagird (Isdegird III., A.D. 632-652 or 653) has given
his name to a chronological era which still obtains among the
Parsis. It dates from June 16th, A.D. 632. He was the son
of Shahryar, son of Khusrau Parwiz, and was an infant at
the time when that Shah and his sons were put to death
after the accession of Shirwi (Kubaéd;!) On that occasion
he was taken for safety to Istakhr. Tabari says that he was

1 See p. 34, 35-
04
YAZDAGIRD 65

murdered at the age of twenty-eight after a reign of twenty
years. He was therefore only eight years old when a party
among the nobles set him up as a puppet king at Istakhr
(Persepolis), the old seat of empire, Ctesiphon at that time
being in the hands of a rival claimant of the throne. In the
contention that followed Yazdagird was successful, and in
the course of A.D. 633 he became recognised as sole Shah,
the administration remaining in the hands of the chiefs.?
He had succeeded to a heritage of woe. His empire was
ill-prepared for the troubles that were in store for it. Ex-
hausted by long wars, torn by domestic dissentions, and
lately devastated by plague, it had to confront a new and
vigorous organization inspired by religious enthusiasm and
impelled thereby to extend its borders on every side. Had
Yazdagird been a born leader of men and come to the throne
in the prime of life, he might for the time at least have been
successful, but in the circumstances, and taking into con-
sideration what we can gather as to his own character, we
can now see how hopeless from the outset his prospects were.
Students of Persian, however, have probably reason to feel
grateful to his reign, for even though we put aside as unsatis-
factory what tradition tells us on the subject, a reasonable
presumption remains that with the return of settled govern-
ment to a distracted country there was a revival of interest
in the story of the franian race and its heroes, and that com-
pilations were then made from which we still though indirectly
benefit.?

§§ 2-11. The following is intended to supplement Firdausi’s
inadequate account of the Arab conquest of the Sasanian
empire. He appears to assign it to the last years of Yaz-
dagird’s then nominal sovereignty. From time immemorial
the [ranians and Semites had been at enmity.? In franian
legend this feeling had found expression in the story of the
wicked Shah Zahhak, who, though originally an Aryan
myth,4 came to be regarded in succeeding ages as an earthly
king with his seat at Babylon. When, later still, the franians
again felt the weight of Semitic oppression, he was turned
into an Arab.5 Although during Sdsdnian times the semi-
independent kingdom of Hira served to some extent as a
buffer-state between the Persian empire and the wilder Arab

 

1 NT, p. 397 seq. and notes. Gi Viole ep: .0 7. LIRIK, Foy site
SRST * Id. pp. 54, 135, 141.

VOL. I% br
66 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

tribes there was always the liability of raids and the danger
was much increased: when Khusrau Parwiz was so unwise
as to put an end to the long-standing dynasty of the princes
of Hira and appointed a governor of his own in their stead.1
In his reign too had occurred the disastrous battle of Dht
Kar, in which the smallness of the forces engaged were out
of all proportion to the importance of the result. The Arabs
celebrated their victory with songs of triumph.? With that
inspiring memory and revelation of Persian weakness, with
the prospect of rich spoil to be won, and a nation of infidels
to be converted, it is not surprising that hostilities should
break out henween the young and vigorous and the old and
enfeebled empire. Muhammad iarneele tradition tells us,
addressed a threatening letter to Khusrau Parwiz, who tore
it up, and the Prophet, on hearing of this, said: “‘ He has
rent his own realm.”? Muhammad died in June, A.D. 632—
the month of the child Yazdagird’s accession. Abt Bakr,
the first Khalifa, being apprised by an Arab chieftain, who
had embraced Islam, “of the state of the Persian empire,
sent his great general, Khalid, to begin hostilities. Khalid
was very successful -in’ numerous engagements, and tem-
porarily the whole tract bordering the western bank of the
Kuphrates from the Roman frontier almost to the Persian
Gulf came into the hands of the Arabs. Khahd made Hira
his headquarters, and was preparing to attack Ctesiphon
and invade fran when he was recalled by Abt Bakr to take
command of the forces destined for the Syrian campaign.
‘“* This is 7Umar’s doing,” said Khalid. ‘‘ He does not want
to see me conquer Trék.’* The departure of Khalid was the
Persians’ opportunity. Encouraged by Rustam, who under
Yazdagird had become commander-in-chief, the inhabitants
of the conquered region rose against the Arabs but unsuccess-
fully. At this juncture Abt Bakr died and was succeeded
by ’Umar, who began his reign by giving Abu ’Ubaida oe
chief command in “Syria in the place a Khalid. Then, i

is said, he appealed publicly to the Faithful to cea
for the invasion of Persia and for two days in vain, the super-
session of Khalid having caused great indignation. It may,
however, have been thought that the acquisition of so much
fertile territory and the consequent proximity to the Persian

 

 

1 Vol. viii., p. 190. : ee D342. SUZAle UMS e5s
*Id.-in-, 348:
YAZDAGIRD 67

capital, were a sufficient achievement for the time being.
Nevertheless, on the third day, when ’Umar made his appeal,
Abt ’Ubaida (not Khalid’s successor) offered himself and
Sa’ad, son of Wakkas, followed suit. A thousand others
imitated their example. *Umar gave Abt ’Ubaida the chief
command as he had been the first to volunteer. The Persians
in the meantime had withdrawn to Ctesiphon, whence Rustam
dispatched a force, which had with it the flag of Kaéwa,!
to watch the enemy. Abt ’Ubaida, who was very inferior
in numbers, threw a bridge across the Euphrates, attacked the
Persians, was defeated and slain. This battle is known as
“The Battle of the Bridge,” and took place in November,
A.D. 634. An attack, however, by the Persians on Hira
failed, and the Arabs raided the Persian settlement of Baghdad
(not of course the well-known city of that name?) where
twice a year a fair was held. *Umar appointed Sa’ad, son of
W akkas, to succeed Abt ’Ubaida, and both sides made efforts
to reinforce their respective armies. The Persian adherents
west of the Euphrates again rose. Rustam crossed the river
with a great host, and advanced to Kadisiya where the Arabs
had concentrated. The battle that ensued is said to have
lasted four days with varying fortune till a dust-storm turned
the scale in favour of the Arabs. The slaughter was very
great and so was the spoil. ’Umar forbade the Arabs to make
any further advance for the present, but as the situation
of their camp proved to be very unhealthy he directed Sa’ad
to choose a more suitable site, whereupon Sa’ad founded
Kufa. Thenceforth the whole of the region west of the
Euphrates was lost to the Persians. To secure the lower
course of the Euphrates and Tigris ’Umar also founded Basra,
west of the Shatt-al-Arab. The battle of Kadistya seems to
have been fought A.D. 636-7, but the chronology of the period
is somewhat uncertain. Then came a considerable pause in
the Arab advance. The Arabs seem to have spent the in-
terval well in securing what they had gained while the Persians
on the other hand appear to have been paralysed by their
misfortunes. At all events, when the invasion was resumed
and Sa’ad, crossing the Euphrates, marched on Ctesiphon,
no resistance was offered and Yazdagird, who had lingered
there too late to secure the removal ot most of his treasures,
fled with his court to Hulwén.? His example of flight seems

EVO ps 54yseg-s  * seenVOl.vi., p..254. See: Vol. \vil,, p. 187.
68 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

to have been followed by a majority of the inhabitants. The
Arabs came in for an immense booty according to Oriental
accounts. If, however, we take into consideration the
domestic troubles of the years preceding Yazdagird’s accession,
and what must have been the financial needs of the short- lived
Shahs of that period, we are justified in suspecting that the
amount of precious metals and of the more portable forms
of wealth generally was not so great as has been affirmed.
Sa’ad, when he had established himself in the Persian capital,
asked permission of "Umar to pursue Yazdagird who had
gathered a considerable army under the command of a
Mihran! at Jalalé in the neighbourhood ot Hulwan. ’Umar
refused to allow Sa’ad to go in person and instructed him to
send instead Hashim who was either his brother or his nephew.
Hashim was much inferior in point of numbers, and it was
six months before he brought the Persians to a decisive en-
gagement. He then won a complete victory, and followed
up his success at Jalula by the capture of Hulwan. Yazdagird
fled to Rai and ’Umar, content for the moment with what
had been achieved, forbade any further advance. The next
stage of the Arab conquest was made outside the sphere of
Sa’ad’s authority, who sent, however, by ’Umar’s command
troops to assist. In the north Mesopotamia, and in the
south Khutzistan, were invaded and annexed. A raid was
made also across the Persian Gulf from Bahrain into Pars,
but without lasting results, as the Arab forces got into diffi-
culties and had to be rescued by an expedition sent for the
purpose from Basra. About A.D. 640 in consequence, it
is said, of complaints made by the people of Kufa, 7Umar
recalled Sa’ad and Yazdagird seized the opportunity to make
a supreme effort to recover his lost possessions. A large
army, summoned from the yet unconquered provinces of the
empire, was concentrated at Nahdvand, some fifty miles
south of Hamadan, and placed under a Persian general named
Pirtzan. On this Umar ordered Nw’mén, who was in com-
mand in Khiuzistan, to gather all av: ailile forces from the
regions already annexed and march against the enemy.
Nwman, who was greatly inferior in point of numbers, found
the Persians strongly encamped at Nahdvand and tried in
vain to bring on a general engagement. In the end he managed
to effect his. purpose by means of a stratagem. He broke up

SEC da pales:
YAZDAGIRD 69

his camp and made a hasty retreat. Pfrtizdn went in pursuit,
on which Numan turned upon him and won what the Arabs
call “The Victory of Victories” (A.D. 641-2). Pirizdn
was taken prisoner and slain, and Nu’mdn himself fell in the
fight. This was the last effort of the Persians at a national
resistance. Henceforth their opposition was merely pro-
vincial or local, and wholly ineffective. One after another
the remaining provinces of the Sdsdnian empire were over-
tun by the Arabs and permanently annexed, while Yazdagird,
who had fled from Rai after the disaster of Nahévand, re-
mained a fugitive till his death some ten years later.

§2. In Tabarf Rustam’s father is called Farrukh-Hurmuzd,
the governor of Khurasan, who was slain, it is said, by Azarm-
dukht and avenged by his son.2 Khurdsdn probably formed
part of the satrapy of Nimritz, one of the four into which Nushir-
wan divided his empire.” Tradition makes the governors
ot that satrapy, and their sons play a very important part
during the last few years of the Sdsdnian dynasty.? The
position of commander-in-chief held by Rustam at the battle
of Kadisiya, probably indicates that he had been instrumental
in bringing about the elevation of Yazdagird to the throne.*

Rustam’s brother was named Farrukhzad.

§3. Mughira, son of Shu’ba, was one of the companions
of Muhammad, and played a prominent role in the affairs of
the time. He went on a similar embassy to the Persians
before the battle of Nahdvand.® He was governor for a time
at Basra,* Mecca,’ and Kufa, where he died in A.D. 670.8

§ 4. Sa’ad took no personal part in the battle of Kadisfya.
He was suffering from sores at the time and had to content
himself with merely directing operations.? Consequently
he did not slay Rustam in single combat as Firdausf states.
When the dust-storm came on the fourth day of the battle,
Rustam was seated under an awning erected on the bank
of the canal of Kadisiya and surrounded by the camels that
carried his treasure. The awning was blown into the water.
and Rustam took shelter among them. In the confusion
caused by the storm, the Arabs broke the Persian centre.
One of them, named Hilal, striking in the darkness at random
among the camels, happened to hit the one under which

‘Dp. 59- *See Vol. vil., p. 214. > pp. 5, 6, 59, 87, 95 seq.
Nae p. 3o7,nore.. NIN, p: 03: SZ elke AA * Id. 404.
WL S52 Eide ekOy ° Id. iii., 398.
70 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Rustam was seated, and cut the cord that secured its load
of treasure which fell on Rustam’s head. Though injured,
he made an attempt to swim across the canal, but was caught
by Hilal and slain.}

§§ 9-11. There is a general agreement in Persian tradition
that Yazdigird did not die a natural death. The scene of it
is mostly laid at Marv, and the most popular version associates
it with a mill. Firdausi’s story evidently has been worked up
as the appeals addressed to Mahwi show. The villain’s
guilt too is more emphasized, and he is made more directly
responsible for the tragedy. Elsewhere the miller murders
the Shah for mere greed. Marv appears to be a likely place
for Yazdagird to have chosen to reside in, as he could easily
escape thence across the Oxus in case of need. In some
accounts he does cross and negotiates to little purpose with
the Turks, but is brought back across the river for the final
scene. What the truth of the matter was seems to be quite
uncertain.

§14. According to the account in the Persian Tabari,:
Mahwi, after the death of Yazdagird, remained at Marv till
he was compelled to leave owing to the approach of the Arabs,
when he fled across the Oxus and took refuge with the Turks?
Their Khan is the Bizhan of the Shahnama.

$1

How Yazdagird ascended the Throne and addressed the
Chiefs

When Farrrukhzad departed Yazdagird
Became the Shah upon the day of Ard
In month Sapanddérmad. What said the man
Brave, eloquent but weary of life’s span ?
“Would that my mother had not brought me forth,
High heaven not turned o’er me !
The days of greatness and the days cf want

1 Id. 396. a7 i eh OSs
YAZDAGIRD 71

For all soon cease to be.
Time, as thou lookest, passeth ; none can take
Arms to contend with it,
So furnish forth the board and drain the cup,
And sad talk intermit.
What though thou ride high heaven yet bricks will
prove
Thy pillow at the last ;
If thou be king what of the end? First throne,
But what when life hath past ?
Let not thy heart be troubled, trust not much
High heaven as thy support ;
It acteth as it willeth ; elephant
And lion are its sport.
*T will outlast thee, its tale is long; be not
With pride of life o’erflown ;
Thou canst not better Faridtin or be C. 2061
~ Parwiz! with crown and throne.?
From those exalt. seven planets do thou well
Consider what to Yazdagird befell.”
When he sat happy on the throne of kingship,
And placed upon his head the crown of might,
He said: ‘‘ By process of the turning sky
I am the true-born son of Nushirwan.
Mine is the sway from sire to sire and mine
Are Virgo, Sol, and Pisces. I will seek
For greatness, wisdom, hardihood, contention,
And manliness, for fe and fortune stay
With none, nor treasure, kingship, crown, and throne.
Fame will abide for aye but not desire ;
Put off desire then and exalt thy fame.
It is by fame that man shall live for ever
While his dead body lieth in the dust.
How good are Faith and justice in a Shah!
The times are full of blessings on his fame.

1 Khusrau Parwiz. * Couplet omitted.
C. 2062

72 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

I purpose while I live to pluck up ill,
Both root and branch.”’

The chiefs applauded him,
And hailed him as the monarch of the earth,
And thus it was, till sixteen years had sped,
That sun and moon revolved above his head.

§ 2

How Saad, Son of Wakkas, invaded Tran, how Yazda-
gird sent Rustam to oppose him, and how Rustam
wrote a Letter to his Brother

It was so that "Umar, the famous Arab,
Commander of the Faithful,! he whose sword
Turned day to night, the man approved by God,
Who hath no equal, sent the chosen Sa’ad,
Son of Wakkas, with troops against the Shah.
When Arab fortune worsted Persian,
And the Sasanians’ fortune had grown dark,
The world had had full measure of its Shahs ;
Gold was not seen, the mite was manifest,
Good turned to evil, evil turned to good,
The path lay Hellward, not to Paradise,
The wheel of circling heaven was changed and cut
All kindness for the Persians clean away.
The slave must do the almighty Maker’s will,
And bear what He inflicteth. Save with Him
There is no life or joy.
When Yazdagird
Learned what had chanced he gathered troops on all
sides,
And bade Hurmuzd’s son Jead them forth. His name

1 He assumed this title.
YAZDAGIRD 73

Was Rustam. He was wary, wise, a warrior
And potentate, a reader of the stars,
Exceeding shrewd and all attent to hear

The archimages’ words. He marched away
With all the noble, those that were alert

And brave, and after thirty months they sought
To fight at Kadisiya. Being learned

In heaven’s lore as an astrologer,

And one both just and good, he said: ‘‘ No time
Is this to fight, the river of the Shahs

Will flow not in this bed,” and so he took

His astrolabe, observed the stars and smote
His head because it was a day of bale,

Then wrote in grief and told his brother all,
First offering praise to God who had ordained
His good and evil fortune, and proceeded :—

*“ Well may the revolutions of the sky

Fill the observer with disquietude !

I am the guiltiest person of the time,

And therefore have been caught by Ahriman,
Because the kingship passeth from this House ;
No season this of conquest and the Grace !
From the fourth heaven Sol is looking down
To hasten to the fight of mighty men.

Both Mars and Venus bode mishap to us,

And none can ’scape high heaven. Mercury
And Saturn are opposed, the former too

Hath entered Gemini. Such is the case,

A great event is toward, and my heart

Is weary of its life. I can discern

All that will be but fain would hold my peace.
When I agnized this secret of the sky—

That it assigneth us but grievous travail—

I wept right sorely for the Iranians,

And burned for the Sasanians. Woe is me
For head and crown, for state and throne, and woe
C.

2063

74 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

For majesty, for fortune, and for Grace

Because hereafter will defeat betide them

From the Arabians, the stars not turn

Save to our hurt, and for four hundred years
None of our royal race will rule the world !

An envoy from our foemen came to me,

And divers parleyings followed. ‘ We,’ they said,
‘ Will give up to the Shah the tract between

The river-bank and Kadisiya; ye

Shall grant us access to some trading centre
That we may sell and buy; we will not ask

For more hereafter ; we will pay large dues,

And will not seek the chieftains’ diadems,

But will obey withal the king of kings,

And render hostages at his demand.’

Such is the talk. No action hath ensued,

But still the stars are adverse. Long will be
The strife. Fierce Lions will be slain by hundreds.
The chieftains that are with me in the war—
Galbwi of Tabaristan and Armani,

Who do the deeds of Ahriman in fight,

Mahwi, he of Suran, and other chiefs,

Who wield the heavy mace and battle-ax—
Heed not our foes proposals but observe :—
‘Who are these haughty folk and what do they
Both in fran and in Mazandaran ?

For road and territory, weal and woe,

We must employ the mace and scimitar ;

We will exert ourselves, quit us like men,

And make the world both dark and strait to them.’
None of them knoweth circling heaven’s design,
And how its aspect hath been changed to us.

On reading this take measures with the chiefs,
Make preparations and lead forth the host,
Collect the treasures, handmaids, and state-robes,
Then hasten Azar Abadagan—
YAZDAGIRD

“I
On

The dwelling of the Mighty and the Free.
Whatever herds of horses thou mayst have

Send to the treasurer of Azargashasp.

If soldiers seek thee from Zabulistan,

Or from fran, imploring thy protection,

Receive and treat with kindness their excuses

In view of what the turning sky is doing—

The cause of joy and terror to us all,

At whiles exalting and at whiles abasing.

Let mother know my words for of a truth

She will not look upon my face again.

Greet her from us and counsel her at large

Not to be troubled here below. If any

Shall bring bad news of me be not too downcast,
For know that in this Wayside Hostelry

He that amasseth treasure by his toil

Will find his toil more than such worldly treasure,
And that another will enjoy the fruit.

What need was there for so much toil and greed ?
Desire is lessened not by having more.

At all times worship God and purge thy heart
Of all affection for this Wayside Inn

Because our fortune is in straits, the king

Will see me not again. Do thou and all

Our House, both old and young, unceasingly
Praise God and pray the Maker, for with this
My host I am in stress, in travail, grief,

And bitter fortune, and shall not escape C 2064
At last. May this sweet country of fran

Be in prosperity ! Whenas the world

Is straitened to the king hold treasure, life,

And person of small worth, for of that race

So famed and honoured there is no one left

Save that exalted one. Watch over him

By day and night till I have fought the Arabs.
Be not remiss in toil for he is now
©. 2065

76 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSf

All that we have to look to in this world,

And the Sdsanians’ memorial,

For no one will behold that House again.

Woe for the head and crown, for seal and right
Since royal throne will go adown the blast !
Fare well, be not concerned, and ever be

Before the world-lord, and if ill betide him
First give thine own head to the scimitar
Ungrudgingly. When pulpit fronteth throne,
And when Abti Bakr and ’Umar shall be

As household words, our long toils will be lost,
And long will be the fall before the rise.

Thou wilt not see throne, diadem, or state:
The stars award the Arabs everything.?

There will not be throne, crown, or golden boot,
Or gem, or coronet or flaunting flag.

One man will toil, another will enjoy ;

None will give heed to justice or to bounty.?
Then warriors will be men that fight afoot
While horsemen will be mocked and flouted at ;
The warlike husbandman will be despised,

High birth and majesty will bear no fruit ;
Then men will rob each other, none will know
A blessing from a curse, and secret dealing
Prevail o’er open, while the hearts of men

Will turn to flint, sire will be foe to son,

And son will scheme ’gainst sire; a worthless slave
Will be the king, high birth and majesty

Will count for nothing; no one will be loyal.
There will be tyranny of soul and tongue.

A mongrel race—Iranian, Turkman, Arab—
Will come to be and talk in gibberish.?
They will collect all treasures *neath their skirts,
Toil and resign the product to their foes.

‘Two couplets omitted. *» Three couplets omitted.
see Voli, pe 4.
YAZDAGIRD Teh

Grief, travail, bitterness will thus prevail

As joy did in Bahram Gur’s days; feasts, song,

Race and renown will cease ; men will set traps,

Will seek their profit in another’s loss,

And make their pretext Faith; no difference

Will be *twixt Spring and Winter ;! there will be

No wine at feasts; they will not recognise

Degree and place but live on barley-bread,

And dress in wool. When much time hath passed
thus

None will regard the noble Persian stock.

They will be shedding blood for lucre’s sake,

An evil age will be inaugurate.

My heart is full, my face is wan, my mouth

Is parched, my lips are filled with sighs to think

That after I—the paladin—have gone

Sasanian fortune shall become thus dark ;

So faithless hath revolving heaven grown,

Ta’en umbrage, and withdrawn from us its love !

If with my lance I strike a brazen mountain

I pierce it, being brazen-bodied too,

But now my shafts with steel-transfixing heads

Are impotent with men that wear no mail !

My sword, which felled the necks of elephants

And lions at a blow, can not cut through

An Arab skin! My knowledge bringeth loss

On loss upon me. Would that I possessed not

This wisdom since it causeth me to know

Of this ill day! The chiefs that are with me

From Kadisiya are both hardy men

And hostile to the Arabs. They expect

That this brake will be filled, that earth will run

Like the Jihtin, with our foes’ blood. None knoweth

The secret of the skies and that this strife

1 Muhammadan years being lunar the months are associated with
no particular season,
C.

2066

78 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Can not be quickly ended ; but when fortune

Departeth from a race what profit cometh

Of travail and of fight ? Be prosperous,

My brother! May the Shah’s heart joy in thee

Because this Kadisiya is my charnel,

My breastplate is my shroud, my helmet blood :

Such is the secret of the lofty sky.

Bind not thine own heart to my griefs but keep

Thine eyes upon the Shah, and sacrifice

Thyself for him in fight, because the day

Of Ahriman is coming on apace

When circling heaven will show us enmity.”
When he had sealed the letter he said thus :—-

‘**“ My blessing be upon the messenger

That shall convey this letter to my brother,

And tell him not what I have said, but other!”

§3

How Rustam wrote to Saad, Son of Wakkdas, and how
he replied

He sent a messenger in swiftness like
The flash and thunder-clap to Sa’ad. ‘They wrote,
In apprehension yet not in despair, .
A letter on white silk and thus endorsed :—
“This from the paladin of paladins—
The warlike Rustam, son of Hurmuzdshah!—
To Sa’ad, son of Wakkas, the prudent, wise,
And circumspect, who hath come forth to fight.”
It thus began: ‘* We still must fear the World-lord,
The Holy, who sustaineth turning heaven,

‘ Cf. Mardanshah as a proper name and p. 59.
YAZDAGIRD 79

Whose rule is justice and beneficence. °

May blessings from Him rest upon the king,

The lustre of the signet, crown, and throne,

The lord of sword, of diadem and lasso,

Whose Grace restraineth Ahriman in bonds.

A hateful matter hath occurred to: us

In these uncalled for labours and this strife.

Reply to me and say who is your king,

Who thou art, what thy rule and custom are,

And whose assistance is it that ye seek

With unmailed soldiery and unmailed chief ?

Fed up with bread thou art still ravenous ;

Thou hast no elephants, no throne, no baggage.
Enough for thee to live within fran,

For crown and signet are another man’s,

Who hath Grace, elephants, and crown and throne—
A famous Shah of lengthy lineage.

No throned king hath such stature or the moon

In heaven such aspect. When enthroned he sitteth
With smiles that make his silvern teeth appear ;
His gifts would purchase Arabs in the gross,

And not impoverish his treasury.

His dogs, his hawks, and cheetahs are twelve thousand,
And they are decked with golden bells and varvels.
The whole waste of the wielders of the spear

Could find not in a year from end to end

Knough to feed his cheetahs and his hounds

When he is hunting on the plain. The Arabs,
From drinking camels’ milk and eating lizards,
Have reached a pitch whereat the Persian throne
Is coveted! Shame, shame on circling heaven !

Ye have no veneration in your eyes,

Or, in your wisdom, love or reverence.

With such a visage and such tastes and ways

Is thy heart set upon the crown and throne ?

If thou art seeking power within thy means,
C.

2007

8o THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And art not merely speaking words in jest,
Dispatch to us some man of goodly speech,
Send some brave veteran and man of lore,

That he may tell me thine intent and who

Doth lead thee to attempt the royal throne.
Then will I send a horseman to the Shah

To ask of him whatever thou wilt ask,

But seek not with so great a king to fight,

For shame at last will come upon thy face.

His grandsire was the world-lord Nushirwan,
Whose justice made the agéd young again.

His fathers have been Shahs, and he is king ;
The age remembereth none like to him.

Fill not the world with curses on thyself,
Misprize not thine own precedents. Regard
This letter of advice and bar not thou

Thine eyes and ears to wisdom.” When the letter
Was sealed he gave it to high-born Piruz,

Son of Shaptr. To Sa’ad, son of Wakkas,

This paladin and magnates from fran,

Of ardent soul, went whelmed in iron, silver,
And gold, with golden shields and golden girdles.
On hearing, Sa’ad, that noble man, set forth,
Swift as the flying dust, to meet Pirtz

With troops, forthwith dismounted and. inquired
About the army and its paladin,

~' About the Shah, his minister and host,

The watchful leader and his provinces.

He spread his cloak beneath Piruz and said :—
‘We hold the sword and spear to be our mates :
Brave warriors make no mention of brocade,

Of gold and silver or of food and slumber.

Ye have no part in manhood but are like

To women with your colours, scents, and forms.
Your prowess is in donning broidery,

Adorning roofs and decorating doors.”
YAZDAGIRD 81

Pirtiz then gave the letter and told Sa’ad

The words of Rustam. Sa’ad heard, read, and
wondered.
He wrote an answer back in Arabic,
Announcing good and ill. He wrote there first
The name of God and of His messenger,
Muhammad, who directeth to the truth.
He spake of Jins and men, of what the Prophet,
The Hashimite,+ had said, the Unity
Of God, of the Kuran, of promise, warning,
Of menace and of novel usages,
Of liquid pitch, of fire, and icy cold,
Of Paradise, its streams of milk and wine,
Of camphor and of musk, of bubbling springs,
Of wine and honey and the trees of heaven.?
Then: “ If the Shah accepteth the true Faith
He will obtain both worlds with joy and kingship,
And have withal the earrings and the crown,
Perpetual beauty and prosperity.
His intercessor there will be Muhammad, C. 2068
His form like pure rose-water. In as much
As Paradise will be thy recompense
We must not plant thorns in the garth of bale.
The personality of Yazdagird,
This spacious world, such gardens, riding-grounds,
And halls and palaces with all the thrones
And crowns, the festivals and revelries,
Are less worth than one hair of an Houri.
In this our Wayside Hostelry thine eyes
Are dazed by crown and treasure, and thou trustest
Too much in ivory throne, in wealth, and signet,
In fortune and in crown. Why be concerned
About a world when one draught of cold water
Out-prizeth it ? Whoever cometh forth
1 Hashim was the great-grandfather of Muhammad.
* This is taken from the Kuran. Cf. Vol.i., p. 99.
VOL. IX F
82 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

To fight with me will see a narrow grave,
And Hell, naught else; but Paradise is his
If he believeth. Mark how he should fare.
He still will choose the one and shun the other
As every wise man knoweth.”

Then he set
The Arab seal thereon and praised Muhammad,
The messenger of Sa’ad, son of Wakkas,
Went with all speed to Rustam. Now what time
Shu’ba Mughira went forth from the chiefs
To journey to the paladin, a noble,
One of the Iraénians, came in from the way
Before the captain of the host, and said :—
‘“ A messenger hath come—a weak, old man—
Without a horse or weapons and ill-clad,
With thin sword slung about his neck and shirt
All plainly tattered.”

 

Rustam thus apprised

Prepared a tent-enclosure of brocade.
They laid a carpet of gold thread of Chin ;
The soldiery turned out like ants and locusts.
They set a golden ante-throne whereon
The captain of the host assumed his seat
With eight score warriors attending him—
Horsemen and lions on the day of battle—
With crowns, with violet robes, and golden boots,
With torques and earrings, while the tent-enclosure
Was royally adorned. Shu’ba Mughira,
On coming to the tent-enclosure, walked not
Upon the cloth but humbly on the ground,
And used his scimitar as walking-stick.
He sat upon the dust without a look
At any—captain of the host or chief.
Then Rustam said to him: “ May thy soul joy,
And by its knowledge make thy body strong.”

Shu’ba Mughira said: “ If thou, good sir !

 
YAZDAGIRD 83

Acceptest the true Faith, peace unto thee.”

Now Rustam, hearing this, was vexed and frowned.
He took and gave the letter to a reader. C. 2069
That learned man told him what was writ, and Rustam
Made answer: ‘“ Tell him: ‘ Thou art neither king
Nor an aspirant to the diadem,

But thou hast seen my fortune in eclipse,
And so thy heart ambitioneth my throne.

The case is one of moment to the wise,

But thou hast not considered it. If Sa’ad
Had the Sadsdnian throne I well might share
His feasts and fights, but since the faithless stars
Bode ill, what shall I say ? This is the day
Of bale. If for my guide I take Muhammad,
And this new Faith for old, all will go wrong
Beneath this crook-backed sky, and all go hard
With us.’ But as for thee, depart in peace ;
The day of battle is no time for words.

Tell Sa’ad: * To die with honour is a thing
Far better for me than crude parleying.”’

§ 4

How Rustam fought with Saad, Son of Wakkds, and
was slain

Shu’ba Mughira went his way, and Rustam
Bade to array the host and sound the trumpet.
From all sides troops assembled, clouds of dust
Arose, and din that deafed the sharpest ears.
‘“* The steely lance-heads mid the murky reek
Are,” thou hadst said, “stars mid night’s azure

gloom,”

» Reading with P.
>. 2070

84 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

While spears ne’er ceased to smite on glittering helms.
The strife endured three days, till water failed
The [rdnians, and their warriors’ hands and steeds
Became unfit for combat. Rustam’s lips
Grew as the dust with drought, his tongue was split,
And men and horses battened on moist clay,
So grievous was the stress !

Shouts rose like thunder
From Rustam and from Sa’ad as they advanced,
Kach from his post. Each left his army’s centre,
And drew off from the field. Departing thus
They came beneath a steep-up eminence,
And there those chieftains twain assailed each other
Revengefully upon that scene of strife
Till Rustam, roaring like a thunder-clap,
Smote with his sword Sa’ad’s charger on the head,
Smote the swift charger which came headlong down,
And brave Sa’ad was unhorsed. ‘Then Rustam reared
Aloft a trenchant blade to show to him
The Day of Doom, and was in mind to strike
His head off, but by reason of the dust
Raised by the troops they could not see each other.
Then Rustam lighted from his steed and saddle
Of leopard-skin and fastened to his belt
His charger’s reins but, while dust blinded him,
Sa’ad hurried up and smote him with the sword
Upon his helm whence blood ran down his face,
And while his eyes were blinded by the gore
The aspiring Arab gained the upper hand,
Again smote Rustam on the head and neck,
And flung his warrior-body on the dust.
None in the two hosts were aware thereof,
Or whither those two paladins had gone,
But searched until they found the scene of strife.
The frénians, when they spied their paladin
Slashed by the scimitar from head to foot,
VAZDAGIRD 85

Fled. Many a chieftain perished in the press,

And many failed for thirst upon the saddle.

The world had had full measure of the Shahs.

The host fared to the monarch of fran,

And hastened on the way both day and night.
When Rustam had been slain in fight, and when
The chiefs’ heads were all turned, the Muslim host
Sped like a savage lion in pursuit.?

At that time Yazdagird was at Baghdad ;

To him the troops came flocking and announced
That Rustam was no more, and that the sea

Was dry with grief, that many men had fallen,
And that the rest had fled the battlefield.

The hosts, both Persian and Arabian,

Reached Karkh, and Farrukhzad, son of Hurmuzd,
Wroth and with tearful eyes came from the Arwand,
Arrived at Karkh, fell on the enemy,

And not an Arab warrior survived.

The Persians marched out from Baghdad intent
To meet the foe, and bloody was the event.

§5

How Yazdagird consulted with the Irdnians and went
Y
to Khurdsdan

When Farrukhzad had gone back to the Shah,
All over dust and in his fighting-gear,
He lighted from his charger, did obeisance,

1 The French version of the rest of this section is as follows :—
“ Yezdegird était 4 Bagdad lorsque ses troupes affluérent autour
de lui. Farrukhzad, fils d’Hormuzd, furieux et répandant des
larmes, traversa le Tigre, entra dans Kerkh et livra un assaut
terrible qui ne lassa vivant aucun des guerriers armés de lances.
Les troupes sortirent aussit6t de Bagdad et allérent chercher le
combat dans la plaine; mais lorsque la poussiére de la lutte se fut
dissipée, les Iraniens étaient en fuite.’’
86 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Blood in his eyes and anguish in his heart,
And said to Yazdagird: *“* Why weep so much ?
Is it to wash the throne of kings with tears ?
Thou only of the royal race art left
To wear the crown and sit upon the throne.
One, with a hundred thousand enemies,
How canst thou battle when exposed to all ?
Betake thee to the forest of Narwan ;
The folk will gather to thee there and thence,
Like valiant Faridtin, do thou renew
The fight like fire.”
The king of kings gave ear.
New thoughts occurred. Upon the morrow’s morn
He sat upon his throne, assumed the crown,
Held an assembly with his men of lore,
The magnates and shrewd-hearted archimages,
And said: ‘* What seemeth good to you herein ?
What precedents recall ye from the past ?
Saith Farrukhzdd to me: ‘ Depart and take
Thy followers to the forest of Narwan :
The people of Amul, are servitors,
The people of Sari all slaves, to thee,
And, when thy troops are many, come again
With puissance to battle with the Brave.’
Do ye approve ?”’
They all of them exclaimed :—
** That is the course.”
The king of kings rejoined :—
“It is not well. I purpose otherwise.
Shall I desert the chieftains of fran,
And this great host, our country, throne, and crown
To save myself ? That were not majesty,
Or manliness or policy. To fight
The foe is better for me than disgrace.
The leopard spake a saw in this regard :—
‘ Whene’er the time of stress shall come on thee
YAZDAGIRD 87

Turn not in folly from thine enemy.’
For just as subjects should obey their king
In good and ill so he must not desert them
In their distress and go off to his treasures.”

The great men blessed him, saying: ‘* Crown

and signet
Exist for ends like these. Think what thy will
And wishes are, and what assurances
Thou wouldst of us.”
The Shah thus answered them :—
** Anxiety is ruin to the heart.
Our best course is to go to Khurasan
Where we shall feel secure from strife with foes,
For there we are possessed of many troops,
And valiant paladins. The Turkish chiefs
And Khan of Chin will come and do us homage
While I will make the union stronger still
By marriage with the daughter of Faghfur.
A great host will arrive to succour us,
The magnates of Turan and mighty men.
There is the warden of the marches too,
Mahwi, with horsemen, elephants, and wealth
Of all kinds. He is our chief governor, C. 2072
The highest of the guardians of our coasts.
I raised him when he was a vagabond,
A minstrel and a braggart, giving him,
Though worthless, name and worth, men, government,
Lands, elephants. Base though he be and vile
Still his advancement hath been at my court.
Now I have heard an archmage quote this saw :—
‘ Of one whom thou hast wrongly harmed beware :
Of one made rich by thee thy hopes are fair.’
I never injured him in aught, and he
Will ’venge me on my foe.”
But Farrukhzad

Smote his two hands together and exclaimed :—
C2073

88 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

‘*O Shah who fearest God! put little trust
In those of evil bent. In this regard
There is a modern saw which runneth thus :—
‘ Howe’er on birth thou practise witchery,
And strivest such an one from rust to free,
Since the All-giver framed him thus to be
To loose God’s bonds thou wilt not find a key.’ ”’
‘“O mighty, raging Lion!” said the Shah,
“To make this trial will work me no hurt.”
He stayed that night and, when the morning broke,
Those noble men set forth and left Baghdad
For Khurasan, and took their travail lightly.
The chieftains of fran all sorrowful
Accompanied their Shah, that noble man,
And called down blessings on him, saying: “ May
time,
And earth, ne’er lack thee.”
From the host rose wails
For grief and at the going of the king,
And all the [ranian thanes—the warriors’ stay—
Drew near to him with outcries and in tears,
And said to him: ‘“O Shah! we are thy slaves
With souls and bodies filled with love for thee.
We all will go with thee to learn how fortune
Will sport with our king’s life, for if we lose
Our Shah how can our hearts find joy in home,
And country ? We will quit our settlements,
Our children, and our wealth to share thy toils.
We care not for our lives without thy throne :
May fortune ne’er abandon thee.’’}
With eyes
All tears the king of kings said to those nobles :—
‘* Be ever more intent in praising God.
It may be I shall look on you again,
And that our sorrows and distress will cease.

1 Three couplets omitted.
YAZDAGIRD 89

Ye all are my true helpers and the heirlooms

Left by my sires. I would not have you harmed :
Share not mine ills then. We will mark the intent
Of circling heaven, its progress, and to whom

It showeth love. Resign yourself thereto :

None can evade its secret purposes.”

Then said he to the merchantmen of Chin :—
“Make no long tarrying here, else will the Arabs
Convert your quest of gain to loss.”

They parted
With pain and trouble, sorrow, care, and wailing.
So Farrukhzad, son of Hurmuzd, led forth
The troops and called the veterans of fran,
And -then the Shah set out with wail and woe.
The leader led the van. Stage after stage
He marched to Rai and tarried there for wine,
And minstrelsy, thence went he to Gurgan,
Like wind, and stayed one se’nnight sad or glad.
Departing thence toward Bust he set his face
With wrinkled cheeks and bedy in ill case.

§ 6
How Yazdagird wrote to Mahwt of Str

The world-lord, resolute to go to Marv,

Wrote to Mahwi of Sur, the governor,

In rage and pain, in tears and hope deferred,
And calling an experienced scribe poured forth
His heart, and it was full. He first praised God,
The all-wise Lord, the Fosterer, the Master

Of circling Mars and Sol, of elephant

And ant, at will creating out of naught,

And needing no instructor, then proceeded :—
go THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

“What hath befallen us! And gone are all

This kingship’s hue and perfume. Rustam’s death
Upon the battlefield and by the hand

Of one whose name is Sa’ad, son of Wakkas,

A landless, low-born, witless, aimless man,

Hath straitened all the world to us through sorrow.
Now that Sa’ad’s army is at Taisaftn,

With woods and foot-hills fronting them, array
Thy host to fight with his and summon all

Thy troops to that same end.t_ Lo! I will follow
Behind my letter swiftly as the wind,

And give thee what I purpose in my mind.’’?

How Yazdagird wrote to the Marchlords of Tis

He wrote moreover to the folk of Tus,

With full heart and with face like sandarac,

First offering his praises to the Judge

“From whom are fortune, strength, and excellence,
Grace, triumph, throne, and diadem of kingship.
From foot of ant to soaring eagle’s plume,

From elephant on land to crocodile

In water, all are faithful, do His will,

And draw no breath unless by His command.

This from the world’s Shah, mighty Yazdagird,
Son? of a famous king and valorous,

Victorious leader of the franian host,

Who guardeth his domain, desireth more,

And cometh of a great, God-fearing race

That thank their stars that they possess the crown,

1 Three couplets omitted. * Two couplets omitted.
* Reading with P.
YAZDAGIRD 91

Have peopled earth and made crown, throne, and
signet

Resplendent, to his marchlords with their thrones

And treasures, Grace, high-bearing, crowns and host

At Shamiran, Ruina,! and Mount Rada,

Kalat and elsewhere. May the Fosterer

Watch over us and keep you from the seath

Of evil hap. In sooth the chiefs have heard,

For it hath been an ensign in the world,

That in regard to warfare, valour, birth,

Our hearts are full of kindness, love, and justice.

High birth especially constraineth us—

The Shahs—to let our toils exceed our treasures

On your behalf. What time Bahram Chubina,

That malcontent, grew noted and rejected

Our rule and diadem ye all abandoned

Your marches, spacious cities, pleasances,

Your parks and palaces, and in that case,

In terror of disaster, made your homes

On dale and lofty height. If God almighty C. 2075

Shall grant me strength and fortune favour us

I will repay your good deeds lavishly,

And pray to Him who watcheth o’er the world.

In sooth ye must have heard of what the stars

Have brought upon our head by these vile Snakes

With looks like Ahriman, who lack all knowledge,

Shame, fame, and treasure, fortune and descent,

And fain would let the world go to the winds.

It is the compass of the lofty sky

That tribulation shall befall this realm

By these vile miscreants, these Raven-heads, ”

Devoid of sense and knowledge, fame and shame.

These greedy men, who covet diadems,

+“ Rouindiz.’’ Mohl.
*The Persians translated “’Arab” by ‘“ Zagh”’ (raven) and
applied the expression to those hated enemies.
92 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSS

Have fixed their eyes upon this royal state,

And Niushirwan once dreamed that this our throne
Would lose its brilliant lustre. He beheld

A hundred thousand Arabs—raging camels

With bits! snapped—seeking how to cross the Arwand,
And bring destruction on our fields and fells,

Saw that both Fire and Fane of Fire would perish,
The light of New Year end and Sada feast,

That in fran and Babylon dark smoke

Would rise from tilth and crop to Saturn’s sphere,
While on the world-king’s hall the battlements
Would tumble to the ground.? The dream is now
Fulfilled and heaven’s favour fain to quit us.
Those that we value most will be misprized,

The base will be set up on high by fortune,

Ill scattered through the world, mishap apert

And good concealed. In all the provinces

Some tyrant, some obscene calamity,

And signs of dark night’s coming will appear,

Our glorious fortune be cut off from us.

Now as our counsellors and paladins—

Men of pure rede—advise we purpose going

To Khurasan and to its warlike marchlords.
Because now of the governor of Tus

Have I'led here the elephants and drums,

And we shall see how fortune will make bonds

Of our frail knots. I am girt up for battle

That I may meet the Arabs face to face,

While Farrukhzad—my very veins and skin,

And my firm friend—is now at Alttiniya,

Intent on fight, and host confronteth host,

While Kashmigan, that warrior’s son, hath reached
Our court and spoken well and loyally.

_ 1 Properly the piece of wood passed through a perforation made
in the nostrils of a camel to guide it by.
*See Vol. viii., p. 66.
YAZDAGIRD 93

I heard what he could tell about these marches, C. 2076

Their heights and depths, their caves, retreats, the
hold

Upon Mount Gumbadan and Jarmana,

The fort of Lazhawardi for our stores,

Spots such as Al, Makhzim, and waste of Gil:

He kindly opened all his heart to me.

My host for battle is too numerous

To tarry long within these narrow holds.

We have held council; all the paladins

Attended ; we debated and resolved

To take with us crown, throne, and seal and
signet,

All garments of Kashmir and Rim and Chin,

Such goods as we can gather from Kibchak

And from Kirwan, all that we have in hand

Of clothes and. carpets, articles of gold,

With gems uncut and all that most we prize.

And provand and equipment for the future.

Of oxen forty thousand will drag loads

Of unthrashed corn and after these will come

Twelve thousand asses drawing loads of dates

For us. A trusty archimage will bring

Pistachios, millet, and pomegranate-juice.

Attending on the outcome they will send

Thereafter many asses’ loads of salt,

And add a thousand camels’ loads of millet,

Fat from the tails of sheep and butter-skins.

A thousand Bactrian camels will bring dates,

Another thousand sugar, as their loads.

Twelve thousand also will bring drums of honey.

All these will come at one time to the holds.

Besides all these my servants will bring in

Some forty thousand salted careases,

And of black naphtha in the next two months

Three hundred camel-loads. An archimage
94 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

With escort will arrive from! Shamiran,

And from Mount Rada while, in sight of all

The elders and the wise, the mountain-chiefs,

Sent by the marchlords, will convey whate’er

Is needed to the gates and give the list

To our own treasurer, and if the Great

Among the folk will but restrain themselves

They will in sooth receive no injury

Among the valleys and the lofty hills

From Arab or from Turkman. Help from you

In these our strenuous times will aid us much.
Our minister, that wise and holy man,

Will now give orders to our treasurer

To send five robes of Persian make to all

That toil for us and, when those toils are over,

A splendid turban of gold broidery.

In these our present troubles each shall have

Two score drachms from our treasures, afterwards,
For service rendered, for each drachm three-score,
Kach worth more than ten dangs,? and he will read
This legend: * In the name of holy God,

The Object of our reverence, hopes, and fears,’
Upon one side. The other side will bear

Our face and crown, the legend: ‘ Through our love
The earth becometh fruitful.’ These have been
Prepared for New Year’s Day, the nobles’ eyes

Fulfilled with wealth. God’s blessing on the man

Whose faults are few and who forgetteth not
Our diadem.”’

The Shah when he had sealed
The letter sent it to the army-chiefs.
With this king’s missive in his hand there came
A horseman of high fortune and high aim.

1 Reading with P.
* The dang properly was a quarter of a drachm.
YAZDAGIRD 95

§8

How Yazdagird went io Tis and how Méhwi of Sur
met him

Thence they conveyed the drums and came to Tits

From Nishaptr. Mahwi of Str had news :—

* The Shah is on the road to Dahistan;”

And went to meet him with a mighty power,

All spearmen and in coats of mail, and when

The Glory of the royal state appeared,

The flag of majesty and such a host,

Alighted from his steed forthwith and paid

His duty to the king of kings, walked softly

Upon the burning dust and from his eyes

Shed tears of reverence. He kissed the ground,

Prolonging his obeisance. All his troops

Acclaimed the Shah and touched earth with their
heads,

While Farrukhzad enranked his powers when he

Beheld the visage of Mahwi of Sur

By whom his heart was joyed and whom he coun-
selled

At large: “‘ This Shah of royal race do I

Commit to thee to serve him, suffering not

The blast to blow on him, and none save thee

To earn his thanks. I must depart to Rai,

Uncertain whether I shall see again

The royal crown for ’gainst these Arab spearmen

Full many such as I have died in battle.

There was not one within the world like Rustam,

The horseman, never hath the ear of sage

Heard tell of such, yet by a Raven-head! C. 2078

1 See p. 91. note.
96 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Was he cut off, so adverse was our day !

God grant to him a place among the Just,

And give the swarthy Ravens to our spears !
Mahwi replied: “ O paladin! the Shah

Is eye and soul to me. I undertake

In thy place to defend thy king, thy Heaven.”
So Farrukhzad, son of-Hurmuzd, departed

To Rai as bidden by the Shah. The sky

Revolved awhile with matters in this stay,

And all love passed from that malignant’s brain,

And none dared go to battle with the Arabs

Because the azure sky was helping them ;

The visage of the monarch of fran

Grew wrinkled ; the foe’s deeds made strait his heart.

Mahwi saw that the Shah was at a stay,

And driven on by fortune helplessly,

Ambitioned speedily the throne and changed

In policy, in manners, and dispose,

Then for a season he began to affect

Ill health and barely showed the Shah respect.

§ 9

How Méhwi of Sur incited Bizhan to war with Yaz-
dagird and how Yazdagird fled and hid himself
ina Mill

There was a paladin, a Turk by race,

A man of influence and named Bizhan ;

He dwelt within the coasts of Samarkand
Where he had many kin. IIl-starred Mahwi,
Becoming self-assertive, wrote to him :—
*'Thou prosperous scion of the paladins !
YAZDAGIRD 97

A strife hath risen that will bring thee profit :
The Shah is of all places here at Marv
And with no troops! His head and crown and state,
Wealth, throne, and host, are thine if thou wilt come.
Recall the vengeance owing to thy sires,
And give this unjust race its just reward.”
Bizhan, considering the letter, saw
That insolent Mahwi would win the world,
Then spake thus to his minister: ‘* Thou chief
Of upright men! what sayest thou to this ?
If I lead forth a host to aid Mahwi
"Twill be my ruin here.’’?
The minister
Replied: ‘* O lion-hearted warrior !
*Twere shame to help Mahwi and then withdraw. C. 2079
Command Barsam to set forth with a host
To aid upon this scene of strife. The sage
Will term thee daft to go and fight in person
At the insistence of this man of Sur.”
Bizhan replied: ‘ ’Tis well, I will not go
Myself.”’
He therefore bade Barsdm to lead
Ten thousand valiant cavaliers and swordsmen
To Marv with all the implements of war
If haply he might take the Shah. That host
Went like a flying pheasant from Bukhara
To Marv within one week. One night at cock-crow
The sound of tymbals went up from the plain.
How could the king of kings suspect Mahwi
Of Sur to be his enemy ? Shouts rose.
A cavalier reached Yazdagird at dawn
To say: ‘‘ Mahwi saith thus: ‘ A host of Turks
Hath come. What is the bidding of the Shah ?
The Khan and the Faghftr of Chin command :
Earth is not able to support their host !’ ”
1 Two couplets omitted.

VOL, IX G
C.

2080

98 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

The Shah wroth donned his mail. The armies

ranged.

He formed his troops to right and left, and all

Advanced to battle. Spear in hand he held

The centre, and the whole world was bedimmed

With flying dust. He saw how lustily

The Turks engaged, unsheathed his sword, and came,

As “twere an elephant before his troops.

Karth Nile-wise flowed. Like thundering cloud he
charged,

But not a warrior supported him ;

All turned their backs upon that man of name,

And left him mid the horsemen of the foe.

The world’s king, when Mahwi withdrew, perceived

The practice hid till then—the intent and plan

To capture him—yet played the man in fight,

Displaying valour, strength, and warriorship,

Slew many at the centre, but at length

Fled in despair, with falchion of Kabul

In hand, pursued by many Turks. He sped

Like lightning mid night’s gloom and spied a mill

On the canal of Zark*. Alighting there

The world’s king lay in hiding from his foes

Within the mill. The horsemen searched for him ;

All Zark was hue and cry. The Shah abandoned

His gold-trapped steed, his mace, and scimitar

With golden sheath. The Turks with loud shouts
sought him,

Kxcited by that steed and equipage.

The Shah within the mill-house lurked in hay.

With this false Hostel thus it ever is:

The ascent is lofty and profound the abyss.

With Yazdagird, while fortune slumbered not,

A throne enskied? by heaven was his lot,

And now it was a mill! Excess of sweet

 

‘ Couplet omitted, a See LEC, p. 400. ® Reading with T.
YAZDAGIRD 99

Bred bane for him and, if thou art discreet,

Affect not this world for its end is ill.

Whiles a tame serpent to the touch it still

At whiles will bite, and hot that bite will be.

Why then affect this cozening hostelry

While like a drum the signal to be gone

Thou hearest, bidding: ‘* Bind the baggage on,

And for sole throne the grave’s floor look upon ? ”
With mouth untasting and with tearful eyes

The Shah abode until the sun arose,

And then the miller oped the mill-house door.

He bore a truss of grass upon his back.

A low-born-man was he, by name Khusrau,

Poor, foolish, unrespected, purposeless.

He lived upon the profits of his mill,

Which gave him full employment. He beheld

A warrior, like a lofty cypress, sitting

In dolour on the ground with kingly crown

Upon his head and with brocade of Rum

Bright on his breast ; his eyes a stag’s, his chest

And neck a lion’s; of beholding him

The eye ne’er tired. He was unique in form ;

Wore golden boots; his sleeves were fringed with
pearls

And gold. Khusrau looked, stood astound, and
called

On God, then said: ‘‘O man of sunlike mien !

Say in what sort thou camest to this mill ?

Why didst thou take it for thy resting-place

Full as it is of wheat and dust and hay ?

Who art thou with such form, such Grace and looks ?

Sure, heaven never saw the like of thee!”
The Shah replied: ‘I am [rénian-born,

In flight before the army of Turan.”
The miller said, abashed: ‘‘ I have no comrade

Save penury, but still, if barley-bread,
C.

2081

100 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

With some poor cresses from the river-bank,
Will serve thee I will bring them; naught have I
Besides : a man so straitened well may wail.”
Through stress of fight the Shah had rested not,
Or eaten, for three days and so replied :—
‘‘ Bring what thou hast, that and the sacred twigs
Will serve my turn.”
The poor and lowly miller
Brought him the cresses and the barley-bread,
Made haste to fetch the sacred twigs and, reaching
The toll-house! on the way, crossed to the chief
Of Zark to make request for them. Mahwi
Had sent men on all sides to find the Shah,
And so the chieftain asked the miller: “‘ Friend!
For whom need’st thou the sacred twigs ? ”
Khusrau
Replied: ‘* There is a warrior at the mill,
And seated on the hay, a cypress slim
In height, a sun in looks, a man of Grace,
With eyebrows arched and melancholy eyes :
His mouth is full of sighs, his soul is sad.
I set stale fare before him—bariey-bread,
Such as I eat myself—but he is fain
To take the sacred twigs while muttering grace.?
Thou well mayst muse at him.”
The chief rejoined :—
‘* Go and inform Mahwi of Sur hereof,
For that foul miscreant must not reveal
His proper bent when he shall hear of this.’’*
Forthwith he charged a trusty man to take

1The tcll-house was at the ford or ferry. The same word
might also mean a place of worship and accordingly Mohl or rather
“Tl se rendit au lieu ot
était l’oratoire et fit prévenir aussitot le chef de Zark qu’on lui

 

his successor (see p. 37 note) translates :

demandait le Barsom.”’
2See Vol. 1., p: 80 s.v. Bayz.

°J.e. if subsequently he should learn that we knew and did

not tell him.
YAZDAGIRD IOI

The miller to Mahwi who asked of him,

Then anxious for himself; ‘‘ For whom didst thou

Require the sacred twigs ? Tell me the truth.”
The miller all a-tremble made reply :

‘IT had been out to fetch a load and flung

The mill-door open roughly, when know this :

The sun was in mine eyes, but his are like

Those of a startled fawn; his locks are dark

As the third watch of night ; his breath suggesteth

Musk, and his face embellisheth his crown.

One that hath never seen the Grace of God

Should take the mill-house key. His diadem

Is full of uncut jewels, and his breast

Bright with brocade of Rim. The mill hath grown

As *twere a sun through him, and yet his food

Is barley-bread, his seat upon the hay !

* Spring,’ thou wouldst say, ‘in Paradise is he:

No thane e’er set so tall a cypress-tree.’ ”’

 

§ 10

How Madhwi of Sir sent the Miller to kill Yazdagird, and
how the Archimages counselled Mahwt to forbear

Now when Mahwi had taken thought he knew :—
*°Tis none but Yazdagird !”’ and bade the miller :—
** Haste and cut off his head forthwith or I
Will cut thine own off presently and leave Gse8e
None of thy stock alive.”
The chiefs, the nobles,
And mighty men heard this and all the assembly
Were filled with wrath at him; their tongues were
charged
102 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

With words, their eyes with tears. An archimage,
By name Radwi, whose mind wore wisdom’s bridle,
Said to Mahwi: ‘“ O thou malignant one !
Why hath the Div confused thine eyes ? This know :
The royal and prophetic offices
Are two gems set within one finger-ring.
To break one is to trample life and wisdom
Beneath thy feet. Reflect upon thy words,
And then forbear. Be not the Maker’s foe.
First will disaster come on thee herefrom,
Then thou wilt leave a seed-plot for thy child,
With fruit of coloeynth and leafage blood.
Ere long thou wilt behold thy head abased ;
Thy villainy will be exposed; thy sons
Will reap what thou hast sown. This deed of thine
Will wreck the Faith of God, and crown and throne
Will curse thee.”
Then a devotee devout,
Who never put his hand forth to injustice,
By name Hurmuzd, son of Kharrad, a man
Who rested in the Faith, said to Mahwi :—
‘**O thou oppressor! quit not thus the way
Of holy God. I see thy heart and sense
Bedimmed. We see thy breast a tomb. Though
strong
Thou hast no brain; thy mind is weak; thou seekest
The smoke and not the fire. I see that thou
Wouldst have the malediction of the world,
And, when thou quit’st it, travail, smart, and anguish.
Now will thy lifetime prove a wretched one,
And fire thy dwelling-place when thou departest.”’
He sat. Shahran rose and addressed Mahwi :—
“ Why this audacity ? Thou hast opposed
The king of kings and cottoned with the Khan
And the Faghftr. Full many of this race
Have proved of no account yet men ne’er hasted
YAZDAGIRD 103

To slay them. Shed not, as thou art a slave,
The blood of Shahs because thou wilt be cursed
Till Doomsday.”
This he said, and sat down weeping
In anguish with heart full and eyes all gall.
Then Mihr-i-Nush stood forth in deep distress,
With lamentation, and addressed Mahwi :—
**O evil man of evil race, who art
Not well advised or just! a crocodile
Respecteth royal blood, a leopard finding
A slain king doth not rend him. O thou worse
In love and instinct than the beasts of prey !
Thou covetest the Shah’s crown! When Jamshid
Was slaughtered by Zahhak did that affect C. 2083
Heaven’s will ? Nay, when Zahhak had won the earth
Abtin appeared, the glorious Faridtn
Was born, the fashion of the world was changed,
And thou hast heard what tyrannous Zahhak
Brought on himself as sequel of his crimes,
For though he lived above a thousand years
Still in the end the avenger came to him.
Then, secondly, when Tur, the exalted one,
Afflicted by his longing for [ran,
Slew in his folly virtuous fraj,
On whom the very dust looked pityingly,
Dispatched him? to the hero Faridtin,
And gave the world to sorrow, Mintchihr,
One of the race, appeared and undid all
Those bonds. When, thirdly, princely Siyawush
Went forth to war, albeit reluctantly,
Afrasiyab, inspired by Garsiwaz,
Washed shame and honour from his mind and wits,
And slew the youthful and right royal prince,
So that the world became his enemy.
Sprung from that prince the world-lord Kai Khusrau

1 His head, according to the story. See Vol.i., p. 202.
C.

2084

104 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Came and filled all the world with hubbub, clave
Asunder with his scimitar his grandsire,+

And frayed all those that else had sought revenge.
The fourth count is the feud against Arjasp,

The slayer of Luhrasp. Asfandiyar

Went forth to fight with him and took swift wreak.
Fifth, is the vengeance ta’en for Shah Hurmuzd.
Khusrau Parwiz, whenas he felt confirmed

In heart and power, dealt in the way we know
Both with Bandwi and Gustaham. The sky,
Which then revolved, revolveth still.? Forgetting
What they had done for him, when his sire’s blood
And love and family appealed to him,

He in his day of strength abated theirs.*

One may not scorn the occasion of revenge,

For such a time will quickly come to thee,

And thou wilt suffer for thine evil thoughts,

Thy son will reap what thou hast sown, and fate
Will not rest long from vengeance; so refrain
From all this treasure-hoard, this heritage

Of crown and precious things. Thou art revolting
Because the Div enjoineth, and abjuring

The way of God. The Div, as thou wilt learn,

Is tempting thee with things not for thine honour.
Burn not thy soul and body in Hell-fire ;

Dim not this world-illuming crown but gather
Thy scattered troops ; recant what thou hast said ;
Go ask the Shah to pardon thee and when

Thou seest him renew thy fealty.

From there prepare to battle with the foe ;

Be instant both in counsel and excuse,

For not to hearken to the words of sages

Will mark thee out as evil in both worlds.

Men bring to naught things done a day too late.

‘ Afrdsiyab, whose daughter Farangis married SiyAwush.
*T.e, history repeats itself, *Vol. viil., pp. 354, 358.
YAZDAGIRD 105

Wilt thou treat Yazdagird, the king of kings,
Worse than malignant Turks, for in the fray
He is a lion, on the throne a Shah

As bright as sun and moon, a memory

Of the Sasanians ? None is girdle-girt

Like him. From sire to sire his ancestors
Were mighty men and compassers of wisdom
From Niushirwan, the Shah, back to Ardshir,
While, seventh backward from Ardshir, Sasan,
The world-lord, had the crown,! for God entrusted
To him the Kaian crown, and all the kings
Were of that glorious race. Now many a man
Hath been thy better, but they ne’er conceived
Designs like these. As for Bahram Chubina,
Three hundred thousand skilful cavaliers

On barded steeds fled at one shaft of his,?

And left the field of fight to him; but when
His heart grew weary of the race of Shahs

The head of his resplendent fortune fell.

So Farayin, who sought the throne of kings
Unworthily and bathed his hands in blood,
Was in like manner miserably slain :

This age endureth not such mockeries.

Fear Him, the Lord, the Maker of the world,
For He created throne and crown and signet.
Defame not thine own person wantonly
Because ere long such things will rise against thee.
Know that whoever speaketh not the truth

To thee is thy soul’s foe. Now thou art sick
While I am as the leech, a leech that waileth,

1 De jure not de facto. The first Sdsdn, here referred to, was
the son of Dara and after his father’s overthrow by Sikandar took
refuge in obscurity. Several generations later a descendant of
his of the same name became the father of Ardshir Papakan—the
founder of the Sdsdnian Dynasty. The Sdsdnians, naturally sought
to connect themselves with the old line of the Persian monarchy, with
the Achaemenids in history and with the Kaidnians in legend. Cf.
Vol. vi., p. 199.

*See Vol. viii., p. 126.
5. 2085

1066 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSE

And sheddeth drops of blood. Thou art thyself
Less than the slave of slaves. Be not ambitious
In thy heart’s thoughts. Leave strife to holy God,
And seck in honour’s way the throne of greatness.”
The shepherd-bornt had set his heart upon

The throne: the archimages’ rede was hard.
So hath it ever been; “tis no new thing:
The flouts of fortune are past reckoning,
Kixalting to the sky above this one,
And making that vile, wretched, and undone,
Not leagued with that, on war with this not bent,
But void of wit, shame, Faith, and precedent.

The archmages all, till the world gloomed and moon
Succeeded sun, warned that vindictive man,
Who was not one hair better for their talk,
And said when night came: “* Ye must leave me now
O sages! I will ponder this to-night,
And take all kinds of wisdom to my breast.
We will call twenty wise men from the host
That we may need not to deplore this ill.”

The prudent archimages went their ways,
The men of war arrived. Mahwi held session
With his confederates? and said: ‘‘ What think ye
Herein ? If Yazdagird remain alive
Troops will collect to him from every side ;
My seeret purposes have been exposed,
And all, both great and small, have heard thereof !
My life will end through his hostility,
And neither folk nor field and fell be left.”

A wise man said: ‘‘ Thou shouldest not have acted
At first so. If the monarch of fran
Be ill-disposed toward thee then past doubt
Ill will befall thee from him, yet *tis ill
To shed his blood for then God will avenge him.
To left and right are cares and pains of all kinds :

17.e. Mahwi. Cf. p. 87. * Reading with P.
YAZDAGIRD 107

Consider how thou need’st must act herein.”
Mahwi’s son said to him: ‘ Well counselled sire !

Since thou hast made the Shah thine enemy

Be rid of him; troops from Machin and Chin

Will come to him and earth grow strait for us.

Hold this no trifle. Since thou hast prevailed

Tempt not the maws of lions. Thou and all

Thy host will be uprooted from the world

If standard-wise the Shah’s skirt be unfurl’d.”

§11
How Yazdagird was slain by Khusrau, the Miller

Thereat the shameless, infamous Mahwi
Turned fiercely to the miller, saying: “ Up!
Take cavaliers and shed my foeman’s blood.”
The miller, hearing, knew not what to do,

But when at night the moon assumed her throne
Departed mill-ward to the Shah and when
He left the court-gate of Mahwi his eyes
Were charged with tear-drops and his heart was full.
Forthwith Mahwi dispatched some cavaliers
To follow swift as smoke, instructing them :—
** See that ye sully not the crown and earrings,
The signet and the royal robes with blood,
And strip the Shah when lifeless.”

With his eyes
All tearful and cheeks yellow as the sun
The miller went, exclaiming: “ Judge almighty,
Who art above the processes of time !
Wring presently his heart and soul for this © 2086
Abhorred behest ! ”’

With heart all shame and qualm,
108 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

With wetted cheeks and tongue all charged with dust,
He reached the Shah and drawing nigh with caution,
As one would speak a secret in the ear,
Stabbed with a dirk his middle. At the blow
The Shah cried: “‘ Ah!” Then tumbled head and
crown,

And barley-bread before him, to the dust !
He that abideth when he might depart
From this world hath no wisdom in his heart,
And wisdom is not in the turning sky,
Whose love is as its stress and enmity.
Tis well to look not on the world and so
From these its doings love and wrath not know.
The planets weary of their fosterlings,

And guiltless folk like Yazdagird are slain ;
None else hath perished thus of all the kings,

Nor of his host a plier of the rein.
The horsemen of accursed Mahwi, on seeing
That royal Tree thus laid to rest afar
From palace and his scenes of ease, drew near,
Gazed, one and all, upon his face, removed
His cincture,violet robe, and coronet,
His torque and golden boots, and left him there
In miserable case upon the ground—
The monarch of fran flung on the dust,
Blood-boltered, with gashed side !!_ Those emissaries,
When they arose, all framed their tongues to curse :-—
“Oh! may Mahwi himself fare, prostrate thus,
All gory on earth’s face.”

They told Mahwi :—

“The exalted Shah hath passed away from throne,
From battle and delights,’ and he commanded
To take, when it was night, the monarch’s corpse,
And fling it in the stream. The miller took
The body of the Shah forth from the mill,

1 Reading the couplet that follows here two couplets lower.
YAZDAGIRD 109

And flung it (mark the horror !) in the water,1
And there it floated with a bobbing head !?

When it was day and people went abroad
Two men of worship visited the spot.
One of these men austere and sober reached
The river-bank and, when he saw the corpse
All naked in the water, hurried back
In consternation to the monastery,
And told the other monks what he had seen :—
** The Shah, the master of the world, is drowned,
And naked in the water-way of Zark !”

Then many of those holy men—the chief
And others of all ranks—set forth. A ery
Of anguish rose from them: ‘ O noble man, C. 2087
And royal crown-possessor ! none e’er saw
The wearer of it in such plight as this,
Or ever heard before the time of Christ
A case like this king’s through his wicked slave,
This misbegotten dog, this reprobate,
Who fawned upon his master till ill came ;
Mahwi’s just portion is to be accursed.
Woe for the head and crown, the height and mien !
Woe for the breast and arms, the hands and mace!
Woe for the last descendant of Ardshir !
Woe for that cavalier so young and goodly !
Strong wast thou; thou hadst wisdom in thy soul,
And thou hast gone to bear the news hereof
To Nushirwan that, though thy face was moonlike,
And though thou wast a king and soughtest crowns,
Yet in the mill they pierced thy liverstead,
And flung thy naked body in the stream ! ’*?

Four of the monks went stripped into the water,
Seized the bare body of the youthful king,

1 Thus, if we interpret the passage by strict Zoroastrian princi-

ples, polluting one of the elements and adding sacrilege to regicide,

but cf. Vol. iv., p. 129.
* Couplet omitted. * Three couplets omitted.
. 2088

IIo THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

That grandson of the world-lord Nushirwan,
And drew it to the bank while young and old
Lamented greatly. They prepared for him
Within the garth a charnel-house and raised
Its summit to the clouds. They sealed his wound
With gum, with pitch, with camphor, and with musk,
And: then arrayed him in brocade of gold,
With fine Egyptian linen underneath,
And dark-blue Russian cloth o’er all. They decked
His place of rest with wine and gum and camphor,
With musk and with rose-water.
When the form
Was hidden of that noble Cypress-tree
What said that honoured thane of Marv ? “ In secret
A guerdon waiteth him that after travail
Departeth with good conscience from the world.”
Another said: ‘*‘ Though man may laugh, yet know
That he is of the sufferers, for he
Will find the falseness of the turning sky,
Which will reveal to him both rise and fall.”
Another said: ‘ Call not him one of wit
That serveth his own form with princes’ blood,
And seeketh wealth, despite of infamy,
With soul unfearful of an evil end.”
Another said: ‘* Since the Shah’s lips are closed
I see not crown or royal seat or signet,
Or courtiers or a realm or diadem,
Or throne or helmet, and if these possess
No moment in themselves why this expense
Of toil and time ? ”
‘** Thy good report, I see,”’
Another said, “ will win thee worthy praise.
Thou in the garth of Paradise didst set
A cypress : now thy soul beholdeth it.”
Another said: ‘* God took thy soul and gave
Thy body to the care of the devout.
YAZDAGIRD I1l

Hereby thy soul is profited, hereby
Will harm betide the foe. The Shah hath now
His work in Paradise ; his foeman’s soul
Is on the road to Hell.”
Another said :—
“ Wise, knowledge-loving Shah sprung from Ardshir !
Thou reapest now the crop that thou didst sow :
The lamp of sovereignty is still alight.”
Another said : “* Though thou’rt asleep, young king!
Thy spirit is awake. Thy lips are mute,
And with full many a groan thy spirit passed
And left thy body free. Thy work is done :
Thy soul is busy now. Thy foeman’s head
Is on the stake. Although thy tongue is tied
Thy spirit speaketh, and thy soul is purged
Although thy form is pierced, while if thy hand
Have dropped the reins thy spirit still will wield
The spear in battle.”
Said another one :—
*O famous warrior! thou hast departed
With thine own works as guide. Thy royal seat
Is now in Paradise; this earth of bale
Is now another’s share.”
* The man that slew
One such as thee,” another said, ‘* will look
Upon harsh days anon.”
The prelate said :—
“Thy slaves are we and laud thy holy soul.
Be this, thy charnel, as a garth all tulips,
This bier thine upland and thy plain of joy.”
They spake, took up the bier and carried it
From waste to mausoleum. Thither came
The hapless Shah, crown, throne, and casque at end.
O man of many years, whose words still run !
Turn from the path of greed, break off thy strain.
What shall we say hereof ? Was justice done,

’
C.

2089

II2 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

Or vengeance by the seven planets ta’en,
On Yazdagird ? The sage, if unresolved
Upon the point, could make me no reply,
Or if he spake ’twould be in words involved
That keep the answer still a mystery.
If thou hast means, good man! indulge thy heart ;
Trust not to what the morrow promiseth,
Because the world and thou perforce must part,
And time accounteth for thine every breath;
Thou shouldest sow not any save good seed
In what remaineth of thy mortal strife ;
Control the door of appetite and greed ;
He that provided will provide through life,
And life itself will but produce for thee
Fair fame and happiness, good friend! Then still
With all thy might eschew iniquity,
For from a wise man should proceed no ill.
Bring wine ; our day is nearly o’er and hence
We must away, for what hath been will be.
Had I incomings balancing expense
Then time would be a brother unto me.
The hail this year like death on me hath come,
Though death itself were better than the hail,
And heaven’s lofty, far-extending dome
Hath caused my fuel, wheat, and sheep to fail.

$12

How Madhwi of Str was informed of the Obsequies! of
Yazdagird and ascended the Throne

One came and told Mahwi of Sur: ‘‘ The world-lord
Is hidden in the dust. The prelates, priests,

1“ Slaying” in the text.
ying
YAZDAGIRD 113

And monks of Rim—all those of life austere,
Both young and old, throughout that march and
land—
Went wailing, took his body from the stream,
And made for him within the garth a charnel—
A great one, higher than the mountain-slopes.””?
Mahwi, that luckless wretch, exclaimed: “ fran
Had ne’er before affinity with Rum.”
He sent and slew the builders of that charnel,
With those that mourned, and gave that march to
spoil,
Such was his will and worth! Thereafter he
Made search throughout the world and found not one
Of that great stock. He had a crown and signet,
The Shah’s erewhile, and to that shepherd-born
The throne appealed. He called his intimates,
Announced the purpose that he had at heart,
And told his minister: ‘*‘ Experienced man !
The day of strife and battle is upon us.
I have no treasure, fame or lineage,
And may but give my head up to the winds.
The name that is upon my signet-ring
Is Yazdagird: my scimitar hath failed
To make men yield to me. Throughout fran
Men are his slaves although his kin is scattered.
The sages do not hail me as the Shah,
The soldiers do not recognise my seal.
My machinations tended otherwise.
Oh! wherefore did I shed the world-king’s blood ?
All night am I sore-troubled in my thoughts :
The World-lord knoweth how it is with me.”
The counsellor replied: ** The thing is done,
And common talk. Act for thine own behoof,
For thou hast burst thy belt. The Shah is dust C. 2090
Within the charnel ; dust hath healed his soul.
1 Reading with P.

VOL, IX H
114 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Call round thee all the world-experienced men,
And set thy tongue to words of pleasantness.
Say thus: ‘ The Shah gave me the crown and signet
As emblems of authority, perceiving
The coming of an army from the Turks, *
Called me at dead of night, and said: ‘“* When bruit
Of war ariseth who can say which side
The dust will be, so take this crown and ring,
For they may help thee on the day of battle.
I have one daughter only left to me:
In truth she is in hiding from the Arabs.
Hereafter yield not to the foe my throne,
And by these tokens walk thou in my steps.”’
I have then from the Shah as legacy
This crown and in accord to his behest
Am sitting on the throne.’ By this device
Give thou thine acts a gloss for who will know
The truth from falsehood ? ”
‘* Good !”’ exclaimed Mahwi,
‘* Thou art a minister—a peerless one! ”
He summoned all the captains of the host,
And spake at large to them to that effect.
They knew: ‘‘ It is not true, and well it were
To cut his head off for his shamelessness.”
A paladin observed: “ ’Tis thy concern
If what thou sayest be the truth or not.”
He heard and sat him down upon the throne,
By his deceit gat hold of Khurasan,
Distributed the earth among his chiefs,
And said: ‘‘ I am the world’s king with the signet.’
He called his kin and said the same at large ;
He took the whole earth as it were a gift ;
The stars were in amaze at him. He chose
The vicious as accorded to his nature,
Debased the sages and made everywhere
Chiefs of the bad. The head of right was humbled,
YAZDAGIRD 115

And knavery on all sides manifest.

He gave his elder son Balkh and Harat,

And sent troops to each quarter. As his host
And treasures grew the heart of that ingrate

Was gratified. He gave his troops rewards

And put them in good case; he filled the heads
Of his own kith and kin with vapourings.

Then with his troops and valiant warriors,
Preceded by the scouts and Garsiytin—

A veteran chief—they marched upon Bukhara,
Intent on war, for ‘‘ Chach and Samarkand

Are ours,’’ Mahwi said, “‘ and they must be made
The captives of this crown and seal, for so

Did Yazdagird, king of the world, command— C. 2091
Chief of the planets seven. With the sword

Will I take vengeance on Bizhan by whom

The fortune of earth’s king was turned to gloom.”

§ 13

How Bizhan, hearing of the Slaying of Yazdagird and
of Mdhwit of Sirs Accession to the Throne, led
forth the Host to fight with him

In time news reached Bizhan: ‘‘ Mahwi hath seized
The throne of might and everywhere imposeth
His seal and signet ; earth accepteth him,
And now with warlike troops his face is turned
Toward the Jihtin for battle.”

‘** Who bestowed
The signet on him ?” asked Bizhan, and one
Acquainted him with all: “ When thou didst reach
The desert of Farab, and fortune’s lips
Were closed to good and ill, there parted hence
ye 2ZOQZ

116 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

To him a force of haughty cavaliers

In quest of fame, for he had said: * If thou

Wilt send me troops I will dispatch to thee

By privy pact the crown of king of kings

With golden throne and signet. In the world

The sovereignty is fitly thine.’ Thy troops

Went hence in haste and found the Shah at Marv.

They compassed him about. The [rdnians fled.

When that wise king was left alone he feared

That ill might come upon him from the host.

There was a certain mill upon the ford,

And thither went the Shah, a sun in Grace.

Mahwi of Str heard of him, sent and slew him,

And through the royal signet gained the world

When he had slain his master. Now the more part

Of praise and blame in this affair is thine,

Thine were the valiant horsemen and the strife.”
Barsam said thus: ‘“O king! what time? I took

A mounted force from Chach? Mahwi had said

To thee: ‘ The golden throne of Yazdagird,

His armlets set with gems, his crown withal

And treasure, will I send to Balkh. The throne

And crown within the world must needs be thine.’

I fought three days at Marv. When on the fourth

The world’s light shone I battled furiously,

For I was pressed. Tyrannical Mahwi

Displayed his back. The Iranian king of kings,

Abandoned, like a furious lion charged

My troops and slaughtered many of my chiefs,

But, when he had no comrades left, he too

Displayed his back; but how that master-slayer,

That faithless slave, put him to death I know not.

Thus with no toil Mahwi obtained and used

His master’s treasures. Then the miscreant,

Becoming dazed by so much wealth, appeared,

1 Reading with P. * Couplet omitted.
YAZDAGIRD 117

Thou mightest say, as if he ne’er had seen me !
Although my troops remained two months at Marv
He gave us no kind look but put to death,
And privily, his lord, so great a king,
The lustre of the world, a cavalier
That ‘raiseth o’er the orbit of the moon
His head amidst the host’ thou wouldst have said.
No Turk encountered and escaped his mace :
He broke our nobles’ hearts. I have not seen
Such breastplate, hand, and mace. Mahwi thus

furnished
Seized on the realm in this unholy wise.
Now that the foe in arms invadeth thee
Thou and thine army must be up and doing.
Let not weeds blossom in the royal garden
Or it will be forgotten.”

Hearing this,
Bizhan raged much at having helped to dim
The fortune of the Shah, then bade assemble
His host of Turks, his horsemen of the day
Of battle, sped forth from Kachar Bashi,
And lost no time upon the road. Whenas
He drew anear Bukhara all the waste
Was covered with his troops to whom he said :-—
‘* Haste not and let Mahwi be first to lead
His host across the water? to contend
With me. Perchance on him I may avenge
The Shah.”
He asked thereafter: ‘‘ Did the king

Leave no availful child ? Had he no brother ?
In the default of sons had he no daughter,
Whom we might carry with us and assist,
And take full satisfaction of Mahwi ?”

Barsdm replied: “‘ My lord! this race’s day
Is passed; the Arabs hold those provinces ;

+ The Oxus.
C. 2093

118 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

No Shah is left or worshipper of Fire.”

Bizhan, on hearing this, resumed his march,
Astound at this world’s doings. Scouts announced :—
‘‘ A host hath come and campeth at Baigand.

They crossed in boats, their dust obscured the sun.”

Bizhan, the chief, led on his troops to war,

And when Mahwi of Str beheld them thou

Hadst said: ‘“ His soul took flight.” He was in
dudgeon

At all those breastplates, helmets, shields of Chin,

At all those maces, spears, and battle-axes

Of Chach. The air grew dark and earth was lost

To sight therein as he arrayed his host.

§ 14

How Méhwit of Str was taken and slain by Order of
Bizhan

Bizhan, when he had drawn up his array,
Prepared an ambush for the franians ;
Mahwi knew of it and with loud exclaims
Departed from among his troops. Bizhan
Looked forth, beheld the flag, and knew: ‘‘ Mahwi
Is minded to take flight,”” and bade Barsam :-—
‘** Lead from the central host what troops thou hast,
And draw toward one side; we must not let
Mahwi decline the battle and haste thus
Jihtin-wards. Speed and keep him well in sight,
For we must deal with him in other wise.”

Barsim of Chin observed the flag and drew
His troops apart until with frowning face,
And malisons upon his lips, he reached
The desert of Farab, there found Mahwi,
YAZDAGIRD 119

And, with his weight upon the stirrups, charged ;
Then, closing face to face, he plied his sword,
Displaying valour, seized his foeman’s belt,
Unseated him and dashed him to the ground,
Alighted, bound his hands, and then remounting
Drove him along in front. With that came up
Barsam’s own comrades, and the bruit of him
Filled all the plain. They said: ‘“‘O chief! Mahwi
Should be beheaded on the way.”
He answered :—
“Not so; Bizhan as yet is not informed
About the capture.”
Presently Bizhan

Gat news: ‘ That ill-conditioned slave is taken,”
Heard and grew glad of heart. He hugged himself,
And thus released from care roared lion-like.
Then many valiant Turks came and discussed
The fashion of the slaying of Mahwi.
All that they recognised as of his court
They put to death—a countless multitude.
They looted all the baggage and dragged off
Mahwi stripped bare of all. The guilty wretch
Lost all his wits when he beheld Bizhan,
Was as a soulless body with affright, C. 2004
And strewed upon his head the unstable sand.
Bizhan said: ‘“‘ O thou miscreant ! may none have
A slave like thee! Why didst thou put to death
That righteous Shah, the lord of victory
And throne, and by ancestral right both Shah
And king, the memory of Nushirwan ? ”
Mahwi made answer thus: “ The evil-doer
Can look for naught but slaying and reproach.
Now smite my neck for wrong done and fling down
My head in presence of this company.”

The other gave reply: ‘I will so act
That I shall banish vengeance from my heart,”’

 
120 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Struck off Méhwi’s hand with the scimitar,
And said: ‘‘ This hand hath not a peer in crime.”
The hand thus lopped, he said: ‘“* Cut off his feet
That he may not escape,” and further bade :—
Cut off his nose and ears, let him be placed
Upon a horse out on the burning sand
Until he sleepeth in his shame.”
They bound him
From head to foot with cords, the clarions sounded,
A herald went the circuit of the host,
And, as he passed the entry of the tents,
Made proclamation: ‘‘ Slaves that slay your masters !
Indulge no foolish thoughts, and may all those
Without compunction for a monarch’s life
Be as Mahwi and never see the throne.”
There was a prince, by name Guraz, at once
The glory and the pleasure of Mahwi.
He was the governor of Marv what time
Mahwi died wretchedly. As eldest son
He was his father’s lustre, who had made
A crown of gold for him. When fortune loured
Upon Mahwi the horsemen rode to Marv
From all sides. Tumult spread. The war-cry rose,
And strife and turmoil filled the land. Guraz
Was slain mid those dark doings, and the day
Of all his race was done. He had three sons
Among his troops, three favourite sons possessed
Of crown and throne. A lofty pyre was kindled,
And he and his three sons were burned thereon.
None of the seed remained or if some did
Men harried them. The chieftains cursed that race,
All vengeful for the slaughter of the Shah :—
‘* May it be cursed and may there never fail
A man to curse it as it hath deserved.”
Bizhan, the Turk, too was an evil-doer.
Ilis own time came, his wisdom was estranged,
YAZDAGIRD 121

And I have heard that he grew mad at last,

And was so till he slew himself. Well done, C. 209.
Thou still revolving, crook-backed sky! Since then

Hath been the epoch of "Umar, made known

The Faith, and to a pulpit changed the throne.

Lr
jal,
Sr

Account of the Completion of the Shéhnama

When five and sixty years had passed me by
I viewed my task with more anxiety,

And as my yearning to achieve it grew

My fortune’s star receded from my view.
Persians well read and men of high degree
Wrote all my work out and would take no fee.
I over-looked from far, and thou hadst said
That they had rather handselled me instead !
Naught but their praises had I for my part,
And while they praised I had a broken heart.
The mouths of their old money-bags were tied,
Whereat mine ardent heart was mortified.

Of famous nobles of this town ’All,

The Dilamite,! most shared the work with me,
For he, a man of ardent temper made,
Through kindliness of soul forwent no aid.
Husain, son of Kutib, a Persian lord,

Asked me for naught without its due reward,
But furnished gold and silver, clothes and meat,
And found me ways and means, and wings and feet.
As for taxation, naught thereof know I;

All at mine ease in mine own quilt T lie.

»In Vol. i., p. 35, the names are given according to the reading
of BCM.
>. 2096

122 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

What time my years attained to ten times seven
And one my poetry surmounted heaven.

For five and thirty years I bore much pain
Here in this Wayside Inn in quest of gain,

But all the five and thirty years thus past
Naught helped; they gave my travail to the blast,
And my hopes too have gone for evermore

Now that mine age all but hath reached fourscore.
I end the story of Shah Yazdagird,

And in Sapandarmad, the day of Ard,

And year four hundred of Muhammad’s Flight,
The last words of this royal book I write.

For ever flourishing be Shah Mahmud,

His head still green, his heart with joy imbued.
I have so lauded him that publicly

And privily my words will never die.

Of praises from the Great I had much store ;
The praises that I give to him are more.

May he, the man of wisdom, live for aye,

His doings turn to his content alway.

This tale of sixty thousand couplets I

Have left to him by way of memory.

My life from days of youth to eld hath sped

In talk and hearkening what others said.

When this, my famous tale, was done at last
O’er all the realm my reputation past.

All men of prudence, rede, and Faith will give
Applause to me when I have ceased to live,

Yet live I shall; the seed of words have I
Flung broad-cast and henceforth I shall not die.

The Shahnama of Firdausi is ended.
INDEX

This Index and the Table of Contents at the beginning of the

volume are complementary.

References to the latter are in

Roman numerals.

A

ABBREVIATIONS, list of, xi
Abtin, father of Faridun, 53, 103
Abu Bakr, Khalifa, 76
begins war with Persian
Empire, 66
Abt ’Ubaida, Arab general, 66
supersedes Khalid in Syria,
66
Abt ’Ubaida, Arab general, 67
made commander in Persian
campaign, 67
slain, 67
Afrasiyab, ruler of Turan, 25,
103
Ahriman, the Evil Principle, 8,
18, 73, 74, 79, 91
Al, place, 93
Alburz, Mount, 25
’Ali, the Dilamite, friend of Fir-
dausi, 121
Altuniya, place, 92
Amul, city in Mazandaran, 86
Apologue, 86
Apothegms, 87, 88, I10
Arab, Arabs, 3, 5, 25, 60, 69, 70,
72, 75 Seq, 79, 89, 92,
94, seq., 114, I17
invasion of fran by, 3, 65
seq.
steeds, II
tribes, 65
triumph of, over Dhui Kar,
66
chieftain, incites Abi Bakr
to invade Persia, 66
concentrate at Kadisiya, 67

 

Arab, Arabs, booty found by, at
Ctesiphon (?), 68
annex Mesopotamia, 68
Khuzistan, 68

— Ae 72
seal, 82
=Sa’ad, 84

defeated, 85
Niushirwan’s dream of, 92
Arabian, Arabians, 74, 85
Arabic, 81
Archmages, vili
Ard, day, 70, 122
Ardshir Papakan, first Sasanian
Shah, 105, 109, 111
Ardshir, son of Shirwi,
vii, 43 seq.
makes Piruz general, 44
entertains Piruiz at feast,
48
death of, 49
treasury of, squandered by
Guraz, 53
Arish, famous franian archer, 25
Arjasp, king of Turan, 104
Armani, franian chief, 74
’Aruts, treasure, 20
Arwand (Tigris), river, 85, 92
Asfandiyar, son of Shah Gush-
tasp, 25, 26 note, 104
Ashtad, franian chief, 11 seq.
chosen to visit Khusrau
Parwiz at Taisafun, 9
and Kharrad parley with
Galinush, 11
visit Khusrau Parwiz,
12
report to Shirwi, 27
Astrolabe, 73

Shah,

123
124 INDEX

Astrologer, 73
Azar, month and day, 17
Azar, Abadagan (Azargashasp
q-0-), 74
Azargashasp, spirit of the light-
ning, 55
temple of (Azar Abadagan)
at Shiz (Takht-i-Salai-
man) in Azarbaijan, 75
Azarmdukht, Shah, viii, 56, 59,
69
reproaches Kubad, 7
end of, 59, 60

B

BABYLON, 65, 92

Zabhak, king of, 65
Bactrian, camels, 93
Bad Awar, treasure, 20
Baghdad, Persian settlement of,

67
raided by Arabs, 67
Baghdad, city (Cf. Vol. viii, p.
109 note), 88
Yazdagird quits, 88
Bahrain, group of islands in
Persian Gulf, 68
Bahram Chubina, franian hero,
6)'15, 16) 22) 90m, 105
assassination of, referred
to, 4
Romance of, 5
Bahram Gur, Shah, 26, 77

Baigand, city and _ fortress
between Bukhara and
Oxus,

Mahwi encamps at, 118
Balkh, city, 116
bestowed by Mahwi on his
son, I15
Pandwi, maternal uncle of Khus-
rau Parwiz 4
execution of, referred to, 4,
16, 104

3arbad, minstrel, vii, 29 and
note
visits Khusrau Parwiz in
prison, 29

lament of, 30

 

Barda’, city on the borders of
Azarbaijan and Armenia,
15
Barsam, general of Bizhan 97,
E17
marches on Marv, 97, 116
Mahwi’s conduct to, 117
pursues and overtakes
Mahwi, 118
captures Mahwi, 119
Bartas, region in Turkistan, 19
Barzin, father of Kharrad, 4, 9,
12,27
Basra (Bassora), city on tbe
Shatt-el-Arab, 68, 69
founded by "Umar, 67
Battle of the Bridge, 5, 67
Bizhan, Khan of Turks, viii, 70,
96
Mahwi writes to, 96
consults his minister, 97
sends troops to Marv, 97
Mahwi makes war on, 115
mz rches against Mahwi, 117
lays ambush for Mahwi, 118
sends Barsam in pursuit of
Mahwi, 118
hears of Mahwi’s capture,
119
puts Mahwi to death, 120
goes mad and kills himself,
120, 12%
Brahman, 21
Bridge, Battle cf the, 5, 67
Bukhara, city on the Zarafshan
river in the province of
Sughd, 97, 115, 117
Bust, city in Sistan, 89

Cc

CAESAR, I0, 23
letter of, about the True
Cross referred to, 22
Chach (Tashkand), city in Turan,
I15, 116
battle-axes of, 118
Chahram (Jahram), city in Pars
29, OI
INDEX

Chin country (often=Turan), 10,
19, 41, 107, 118
sashes from, 12, 53
gold thread of, 82
Khan of, 87
merchantmen of, 89
shields of, 118
Christ, 24, 109
Cross of, 23
Christian, 23
Commander of the Faithful, 72
’Umar, the first. 72 and note
Contents Table of, vii
Cross, the true, 4, 5, 10, 2.
restoration of, 7, 56
of Christ, 23
Elevation of, 43
Crystal, House of, 25 and note
Ctesiphon (Taisafin 4g.v.), 65
seq.
taken by Shahrbaraz, 43, 44
Sa’ad, 67
booty found at, 68

D

DauIsTAN, town, also district
north cf the Atrak. 95
Dai, day, 17
Dang, coin, 94 and note
Darkness, House of, 7
Dastagird, city, 7
Dhu Kar, Battle of, 4, 5, 66
Dilamite, ’Aif the, friend of Fir-
dausi, 121
Div, divs, 18, 25
=Ahriman, 47, 102, 104

E

EGYPTIAN, IIO
linen, t1o

F

FaGuHFur of Chin, 87, 97, 102
Faithful, Commander of the, 72
*Umar, the first, 72 and note

 

125

Farab (Firabr), town on the
Oxus opposite to Amwi,
desert cf, 115, 118
Farayin (Guraz, Shahrbaraz q.v.),
Shah, vii, 50, 53, 105
accession-speech of, 52
counselled by his eldest son,
52
counselled by his youngest
son, 53
misrule of, 53
plot against, 54
Faridun, Shah, 25, 39, 53, 71,

86, 103

Farruhan (Farrukhan). See Far-
ayin.

Farrukhan (Farruhan). See Far-
ayin.

Farrukh-Hurmuzd (Hurmuzd
q.v.), father of Rustam, 69
Farrukhzad, Shah, vii, 61 seq.,

70
Siyah Chashm and, 62
poisons, 63
Farrukhzad, son of Hurmuzd,
brother of Rustam, and
favourite of Khusrau Par-
wiz, 23, 87, 92, 95
bribes Mihr Hurmuzd to
murder Khusrau Parwiz,

33
defeats the Arabs, 85
counsels Yazdagird, 86, 87
leads the host to Khurdasan,

89
entrusts Yazdagird to
Mahwi, 95

goes to Rai, 96
Farid, son of Shirin and Khusrau
Parwiz, 39
Firdausi, 69
account of Arab conquest
by, supplemented, 65
Yazdagird’s death, 70,
107
reflections on, 108,
111
on completion of Shahnama,
121
friends and assistants of, 121
exempt from taxation, 121
126

Firdausi, time spent on Shah-

nama, by, 122
praise of Sultan Mahmud,

by, 122

Flight of Muhammad, referred
to, 122

Ford and toll-house of Zark, 100
and note, 116

G

Gatpwf, franian chief, 74
Galinush, Persian general, 5, II,

12
parley of, with Kharrad and
Ashtad, 11

Gang-dizh, stronghold, 25
Garsiwaz, brother of Afrasiyab,
103
Garsiyun, franian chief, 115
Gashasp, father of Ashtad q.v., 11
Gemini, constellation, 73
Gil (Gil, Gilan ?), district on
south-west coast of Cas-
pian, 93
Glory. See Grace.
Grace or Glory, the divine, 8, 26,
39; 31, 41, 44, 47, 73) 74)
79, 90, 91, 95, 99, 100,
IOI, I16
Giidarz, franian hero, 25
seventy sons of, 25
Gumbadan, Mount, 93
stronghold on, 93
Guraz (Shahrbaraz, Farayin
g-v.) general of Khusrau
Parwiz and Shah, vii, 44
rebellion of, 45
message of, 45
writes to Pirtiz, 46
Piruz writes to, 47
account of, 50
meaning of, 50
dual personality of, 50
marches on Taisaftn, 51
confers with franian mag-
nates, 51
misrule of, 53
conspiracy against, 54
goes hunting, 55

INDEX

Guraz, end of, 55

Guraz, son of Mahwi,
referred to, 107, 115
governor of Marv, 120
put to death with his sons,

120
Gurdwi, brother of Bahram
Chubina, 6
Gurdya, sister of Bahram Chu-
bina, 6

Gurgan, province on the south-

eastern shores of the
Caspian, 89

Gushtasp, Shah, 25

Gustaham, maternal uncle of

Khusrau Perwiz, 4, 6
assassination of, referred to,
16, 104

H
HaMaDAN, city in "Irak ’Ajami,

Haram, of Khusrau Parwiz, 4, 5
Harat, city in north-western
Afghanistan, 115
bestowed by Mahwi on his
son, I15
Hashim, Arab general, 68
sent by "Umar in pursuit of
Yazdagird, 68
wins battle of Jalula, 68
takes Hulwan, 68
Hashimite =Muhammad, 81 and
note
Heraclius, Eastern Roman Em-
peror, 5, 7
Shirwi’s letter to, 7
alliance of, with Shahr-
baraz, 44
Hilal, Arab, 69
slayer of Rustam son of
Farrukh-Hurmuzd, 70
Hindustan, 17, 20
Hira, city, west of the Euphrates
near Nedjef, 5, 66
kingdom of, 65
abolished by Khusrau
Parwiz, 66
attacked by Persians, 67
INDEX

Heuri, 81
House of Darkness, 7
Crystal, 25 and nole
Hulwan, town on the border of
"Irak ’Ajami, west of Kir-
manshah
Yazdagird retires to, 67
taken by Hashim, 68
Hurmuzd, son of Nushirwan,
Shah, 4, 15, 104
Hurmuzd (Hurmuzdshah, Far-
rukh-Hurmuzd 4q.v.),
father of Rustam, 72, 78
85, 89, 96
Hurmuzd Shahranguraéz (Shah-
ranguraz q.v.), 54
Hurmuzd, devotee, 102
pleads with Mahwi for Yaz-
dagird, 102
Husain, friend of Firdausi, 121
Hushang, Shah, 25, 41

I

INDIAN, scimitar, 17
script, 17
scribe, 17
fraj, son’of Faridun, 103
"Irak, 66
fran, vii, viii, 9 seg., 15, 21, 22,
31, 36, 38, 39, 44, 45, 51,
66, 74, 75, 79, 85, 86, 88,
92, 96, 103, 106, 108, 113
franian, franians, viii, 22, 23,
49, 47, 48, 63, 73, 76, 88,
90, I16
homage Shirwi, 8
choose two chiefs to visit
Khusrau Parwiz in prison,

9
plot against Guraz, 54
go hunting with Guraz, 55
Trace, 65
enmity of, with Semite,
65
announces errival of Shu’ba
Mughira to Rustam, 82
defeat of, at Kadisiya, 84
retreat to Yazdagird, 85
—born, 99

 

127

franians, defeat of, at Marv, 116
ambushed, 118

Istakhr (Persepolis), 50, 54
Yazdagird taken to, 64
made Shah at, 65

J

JAHRAM. See Chahram.
Jalula, 68
Jamasp, minister of Gushtasp, 26
Jamshid Shah, 25, 39, 103
Jarmana, place, 93
Jerusalem, 43

Elevation of the True Cross

at, 43

Jesus, Io
Jihun (Oxus), river, 77, 115, 118
Jins, 81

K

KABUL, city
falchicn of, 98
Kachar Bashi, city in Turan, 117
Kadistya, town west of Euph-
rates and near
Nedjef, 5, 73, 74, 77, 78
Battle of, 5, 67, 69
date of, 67
canal of, 69
Rustam advances to, 73
Kaian, crown, II, 105
Kai Kaus, Shah, 25
Kai Khusrau, Shah, 25, 103
Kai Kubad, Shah, 2
Kalat, stronghold, 91

| Karan, franian hero, 25

Karkh, a suburb of Baghdad, 85
Arab defeat at, 85
Kashmigan, son of Farrukhzad,
92
Kawa, the smith, 30
flag of, 30, 67
Khalid, Arab general, 66
begins hostilities against
Persian Empire, 66
recalled to lead Syrian cam-
paign, 66
128

Khan of Chin, 87, 102
=Bizhan, 97
Kharrad, son of Barzin, franian
minister, 4, II, 12, 24
end of, 4
chosen to visit Khusrau
Parwiz at Tais<e fin, 9
Ashtad and, parley with Gal-
intish, 11
visit Khusrau Parwiz, 12
report to Shirwi, 2
Kharrad, father of Hurmuzd, to2
Khurasan, province in north-
eastern fran, viii, 59, 69,

87, 88, 92
Mahwi becomes master of,
114
Khusrau Parwiz, Shah, vii,

4 Seq., II, 12, 25, 26 note,
30, 315 33 Seq-, 30° Seq:
45 Seq.
charges against, 4, 5, 9, 10
reply of, to charges, 5, 14
Seq.
Haram of, 4, 5
last days cf, Theophanes’
account of, 6
Shirwi’s treatment of, 7
sons of, executed, 7, 35
Shirin and, 7
imprisoned at Taisaftin, 9
companioned by Shirin, 2
Barbad visits, 29
laments over, 30
steed of, 30
son of, 31
referred to, 33 and note
kingdom of Hira abolished
by, 66
Muhammad’s letter to, 66
KKhusrau, father of Pirtz, vii, 44,
46, 48, 49, 51, 57
Khusrau, a miller, iii, 99. See
Miller.
Khuzistan (Susiana), province at
head ot Persian Gulf
annexed by Arabs, 68
Khuzra, treasure, 20
Kibchak, region east of the Jax-
artes and north ef Vash-
kand, 93

 

INDEX

Kirwan (Karwan, district north
of Jaxartes ?), 93

Kisra Nushirwan. See Nushir-
wan.

Kubad, son of Pirtiz, Shah, 22,

25
Kubad (Shirwi g.v.), Shah, vii,
354 Oy Dl 2) lA ean es 2s
47, 04
tragic reign of, 3
pestilence during, 3
boorishness of, 3
difficult situation of, 3
reproached by his sisters, 7
Kufa, city, west of Euphrates
and north of Nedjef, 68,
69
founded by Sa’ad, 67
Kuran, 81
quoted, 81 and note
Kutib, father of Husain, 121

L

Lazhawardi fort, 93
Luhrasp, Shah, 104

M

MAcuin (China), 107
Mahmud, Sultan, praise of 122
Makhzuim, place, 93
Mahwi, Persian chief, vili, 70, 74,
89, 95, 97. 100 seg. 118
described, 87
Farrukhzad entrusts Yaz-
dagird to, 95
accepts charge of Yazda-
gird, 96
becomes disaffected to Yaz-
dagird, 96
writes to Bizhan, 96, 116
betrays Yazdagird, 97, 98,
LLOWUL7
quest of, for Yazdagird, 100
has tidings of Yazdagird,
IOI
consults his warriors, 106
son of, counsels, 107
INDEX

Mahwi, son of, receives Balkh and
Harat, 115
governcr of Marv, 120
put to death with his
sons, 120
sends miller to slay Yazda-
gird, 107, 116
troops after miller with
instructions, 107
troops of, strip corpse of
Yazdagird, 108
hears of death of Yazdagird,
108
bids miller throw corpse of
Yazdagird into stream,
108
slays monks, 113
consults his intimates and
minister, 113
advised by his minister, 113
claims the throne on false
pretences, 114
becomes master of Khur-
asan, 114
evil rule of, 114
makes war on Bizhan, 115
conduct of, to Barsam, 117
cresses Oxus and camps at
Baigand, 118
flees, 118
overtaken by Barsam, 118
captured by Barsam, 119
put to death by Bizhan, 120
Marchlords, viii
Mardanshah (Yalan-sina q.v.),5, 6
son of, 5, 6
conspires against Khusrau
Parwiz, 6
mutilation and execution of,
6
Mardanshah (Mardasas), son of
Shirin and Khusrau Par-
wiz, 39
Mardasas (Mardanshah q.v.), 7
execution of, 7
Mars, planet, 73, 89
Marusipand, palace, 11
Mary, oasis and city in ancient
northern Khurasan, now
in Turkistan, 70, 89, 116,
117

VOL. IX

 

129

Marv, traditional scene of Yaz-
dagird’s death, 70
Yazdagird at, 97, 116
thane of, 110
apothegm of, 110
conduct of Mahwi to Bar-
sam at, 117
Guraz, son of Mahwi, gov-
ernor of, 120
Mazandaran, region between
Alburz range and Caspian,

74
Mecca, city, 69
Mercury, planet, 73
Mesopotamia,
annexed by Arabs, 68
Mih-Azar-Gushnasp, minister of
Ardshir, son of Shirwi, in
Arabic Tabari, 43
put to death, 43
Mihr, feast, 40 :
Mihr ’Hasis, minister of Ardshir,
son of Shirwi, in Persian

Tabari, 43
put to death, 43
Mihbr Hurmuzd, murderer of

Khusrau Parwiz, vii, 34
account of, 5
referred to, 6, 33
conspires against I[Xhusrau
Parwiz, 6
put to death, 7
described, 33
Mihr-i-Nush, 103
pleads with Mahwi for Yaz-
dagird, 103
Mill, viii, 98, 116
Miller, viii, 70
Yazdagird and, 99
informs chief of Zark about
Yazdagird, 100
informs Mahwi about Yaz-

dagird, ror
bidden to slay Yazdagird,
10

bidden to fling corpse into
stream, 108
Mintichihr, Shah, 103
Mir Khand, distich of, quoted, 56
Monks, 109
find Yazdagird, 109
130

Monks, lament over and entomb
Yazdagird, 109 seq.
sentences of, over Yazda-
gird, 110
slain by Mahwi, 113
Mughira, son of Shu’ba. See
Shu’ba Mughira, 69
Muhammad, the Prophet, 69, 81
seq.
letter of, to Khusrau Par-
wiz, 66
Flight of, reterred to, 122
Muslim, 85

N

NAHAVAND, city, south of Ham-
adan, 68, 69
Yazdagird concentrates his
forces at, 68
Battle of, 69
Narwan, forest of, 86
Nastur, son of Shirin and Khus-
rau Parwiz, 39
Nile, 98
Nimruz*, 5, 6
satrapy of, 69
Nishapur, city in Khurasan, 95
Niyatuis (Theodosius, son of
Maurice), 2
Note on Pronunciation, xii
Nu’man bin Munzir, prince of
Hira, 5
Nu man, Arab general, 68
sent by’ Umar to fight Yaz-
dagird, 68
defeats Pirizan at Naha-
vand, 68
slain, 69
Nushirwan, Shah, 22, 26, 71, 80,
2, 105, 100, 110, 119
Letter of Counsel of, 22
division of Empire by, 69
dream of, 92

 

INDEX

O

OmeEN of the quince, 13, 14
Oxus (Jihun), river
referred to, 117 and note, 118

12

Panvtavt, middle Persian Jan-
guage of Ashkanian (Par-
thian) and Sasanian times,
50

Paidawasis, Persian coin=five
dinars, 19

Pars (Persis, Farsistan), country
on eastern shore of Per-
sian Gulf, 68

Parsis, 64

Parwiz. See Khusrau Parwiz.

Persepolis (Istakhr), 65

Persia, 66

Persian, Persians, 5, 7, 290, 37,
40, 54, 60, 66, 67, 69, 79,

2, 77» 79, 85, 121

ideas on marriage, 7
language, 12, 65
=Ashtad and Kharrad, 24
exonerate Shirin, 38
empire, 65, 66
Gulf, 66, 68
win ‘“‘ The Battle of the

Bridge,”’ 67
fail in attack on Hira, 67
defeat of, at Kadisiya, 67,

84
Jalula, 68
Nahavand, 69
Shu’ba Mughira’s embassy
to, 69
robes, 94
transcribe Shahnama _ for
Firdausi, 121
Pestilence, in reign of Kubad,
3,7
Pirtiz, son of Khusrau, minister
of Ardshir son of Shirwi,
vil
appointed general, 44

*See p. 333 note.
INDEX

Piriz, letter of Guraz to, 46
takes counsel, 46
writes to Guraz, 47
Guraz marches against, 48
appeals to Tukhar, 48
feasts with Ardshir, 48
informs Gurdz of the death
of Ardshir, 51
put to death, 57
Pirtz, franian prince, 59
Piriz, son of Shaptr, franian
noble
takes Rustam’s
Sa’ad, 80, 81
Pirtiizan, Persian general,
commands Persian forces at
Nahavand, 68
slain, 69
Pisces, constellation, 71
Plague. See Pestilence.
Pronunciation, Note on, xii
Purandukht, Shah, vii, 56
reproaches Kubad, 7
makes Shahranguraz prime
minister, 56
True Cross and, 56
Pusfarrukh, 50

letter to

Q

QUINCE, omen of the, 13, 14

R

RApDA, Mount, 91, 94
Radwi, archimage
pleads with Mahwi for Yaz-
dagird, 102
Rai, city and district near Tih-
ran, 68, 69, 89, 95, 96
Raja, 17
letter of, 57
put in charge of Shirin, 17
Raven, Raven-head, 91 and nofe,
95 note, 96
Revellers Rosary of 38, 40
Roman, 50, 66
Rosary of Revellers, 38, 40
Ruina, place, 91

131

| Rim, Eastern Roman Empire,
TOs HT.) 20,.30;/41, 45, 46,
113
brocade of, 99, 1or
monks of, slain by Mahwi,
113
Ruman, Ruimans, 23, 60
Russian, cloth, 11o
Rustam, son of Zal, franian hero,
25
Rustam, Persian commander
in chief under Yazdagird
TIT, vii, 66,67, 69; 73,
81 seq., 90, 95
overthrows Azarmdukht, 59
advances to Kadisiya, 67,

73

end of, 69

finds evil aspects in the stars,
TS

writes to his brother, 73

hears of Shu’ba Mughira’s
arrival, 82

S

son of Wakkas, Arab
general, viii, 67, 68, 82
Seq., 90
succeeds Abu ’Ubaida, 67
at Kadisiya, 67, 69
founds Kufa, 67
takes Ctesiphon, 67
recalled, 68
sent by ’Umar to invade
fran, 72
letter of Rustam to, 78
taken by Pirtiz 80, 81
Sada, feast, 40, 92
Samarkand, city in Turkistan,
96, I15
Sapandarmad, month, 70, 122
Sari, city in Mazandaran, 86
Sasan, son of Dara, 105 and note
lineage of 56, 105

Sa’aD,

 

Sasanian, Sdsanians, 4, 5, 46,
47, 50, 54, 65, 72, 73, 79;
77, 83, 105
Dynasty, 4
132

Sasanian, Empire, conquered by
the Arabs, 65 seq.
Satrapy, satrapies, Nushirwan’s

four, 69
Saturn, planet, 73
sphere of, 92
Seasons, confusion of the, 77 nole
Semite, race, enmity of, with
franians, 65
Shabdiz, steed of Khusrau Par-

wiz, 30
Shahnama, viii, 4 seq., 43, 50, OI,
70
completion of, Firdausi on,
121

length of, 122
date when completed, 122
Shahran, 102
pleads with Mahwi for Yaz-
dagird, 102
Shahranguraz (Hurmuzd Shah-
ranguraz, Guraz q.v.), vii,
50
heads conspiracy against
Guraz, 54
Shahrbaraz (Guraz q.v.), franian
general, 43, 50
rebellion of, 43, 44
alliance of, with Heraclius, 44
Shahr-Barz. See Shahrbaraz.
Shahguraz (Shahrbaraz q.v.), 50
Shahrwaraz (Shahrbaraz q.v.), 50
Shahryar, son of Shirin and
Khusrau Parwiz, 39
father of Yazdagird, 64
Shamiran, stronghold north of
Harat (?), 91, 94
Shapur, father of Pirtz, 80
Shatt-al-Arab, the combined
streams. of the Tigris and
Euphrates, 67
Shirin, wife of Khusrau Parwiz,
vii, 28, 36
Kkhusrau Parwiz and, 7
has charge of Shirwi’s horo-
scope, 16
Raja’s letter, 17
companions Khusrau
wiz in prison, 2
reproached and summoned
by Shirwi, 36

Par-

 

INDEX

Shfrin, makes her will, 36
goes to Court 37
justifies herself, 38, 40
sons of, 39
unveils to the Court, 39
Shirwi falls in love with,
39
makes request of Shirwi, 40,
41
goes home, 40
distributes her wealth, 40
frees her slaves, 41
poisons herself, 42
Shirwi (Kubad q.v.), Shah, vii,
TON Ls 27 Zor sursegas
36, 45, 47, 64
treatment of Khusrau Par-
wiz by, 7
writes to Heraclius, 7
horoscope of, 16
kept by Shirin, 16
Ashtad and Kharrad report
their interview with Khus-
rau Parwiz to, 2
reproaches and
Shirin, 36, 37
falls in love with Shirin, 39
grants Shirin’s requests, 40,
42
poisoned, 42
son of, 42
length of reign of, 42
Shu’ba Mughira, companion of
the Prophet, 69, 83
embassy of, 69, 82
Sikandar (Alexander the Great),

summons

Shah, 26
Siyah Chasm, slave of Farrukh-
zad, 62
handmaid of Farrukhzad
and, 62

imprisoned, 62
released, 62
poisons Farrukhzad, 63
Siyawush, son of Kai Kaus, 25
and note, 26 note, 103
Snakes=Arabs, 91
Sur, Suiran, city near Ispahan,
7A, 89, 195,97, LOO, 216;
118
Syrian, 66
INDEX 133

TL

Taparf, historian, 4, 56, 61, 64,
69
Arabic, 4, 5, 7, 43, 50
Persian, 4, 5, 43, 70
Tabaristan (Mazandaran), 74
Table of Contents, vii
Tahmuras, Shah, 25
Taisafun (Ctesiphon), city on left
bank of Tigris, 9, 10, 90
I<husrau Parwiz imprisoned
at, 9
Barbad visits Khusrau Par-
wiz at, 29
Taraz, city north-east of Tash-
kand, 41
Taxation, Firdausi’s exemption
from, 121
Theophanes, Greek Chronicler,
account of last days of
Khusrau Parwiz by, 6
Tigris, river, 67
Toll-house and ford of Zark, roo
and note, 116
Tukhar, franian general,
refuses to help Pirtiz against
Guraz, 48
Tur, son of Faridun, 103
Turan, 11, 89, 99
Turk, Turks, 70, 96 seq., 105, 114,
117, 120
Turkish, 87
Turkistan, 15
Turkman, Turkmans, 25, 76, 94
king = Afrasiyab, 25
Tus, city in Khurasan, viii, 90,
95
governor of, 92

U

"UMAR, Khalifa, 66 seq., 72, 76,
121
founds Basra, 67
sends Hashim in pursuit of
Yazdagird, 68
Nu’man to fight Yazda-
gird, 68
Sa’ad to invade fran, 72
Urmuzd, the Good Principle, 2.

 

V

VENUS, planet, 26, 73
Victory of Victories, The, 69
Virgo, constellation, 71

W

WakkKAs, father of Sa’ad q.v.,
vill, 72, 78, 82, 90

ays

YALAN-SiINA (Mardanshah q.v.),
6

Yazdagird, Shab, viii, 5, 61, 64
SEGe OO eSEGs, M7 Zuo ln OO;

LOL, LO5, 106) 103s) 115,
POW 22

_Era of, 64

taken for safety to Istakhr,
64

age of, at accession, 65

difficult position of, 65

historical importance of
reign of, 65

flight of, from Ctesiphon, 67
Hulwan, 68

last attempt of, to recover
his empire, 68

concentrates his forces at
Nahavand, 68

defeated and a fugitive, 69

death of, referred to, 69

host returns to, after I<ad-
islya, 85

hears of Rustam’s death, 85

quits Baghdad, 88

makes for Marv, 89

entrusted to Mahwi by
Farrukhzad, 95, 96

at Marv, 97, 116

hears of the coming of the
Turks, 97

betrayed by Mahwi, 98

defeated, 98, 116
134 INDEX

Yazdagird, miller and, 99 seq.

described, 99, IOI

Mahwi bids miller slay, 107,
116

slain, stripped and flung into
stream, 108, 109 and note

corpse of, recovered, lam-
ented over and entombed,
109 seq.

Firdausi on, II!

Z

ZABULISTAN, 75*
Zahhak, Shah, 25, 65, 103

 

Zahhak, an Aryan myth, 65
king of Babylon, 65
an Arab, 65
Zal, son of Sam and father of
Rustam, 25
Zark, town south-east of Marv,
98
canal of, 98
corpse of Yazdagird flung
into, 109
recovered from, 109
ford and toll-house of, 100
and note
chief of, 109
_ hears from miller about
Yazdagird, 109

*See p. 333 note.
GENERAL LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

AM.
AS:
BAG.
BAN.
BBR.

BCM.

BGDF.

BHA.

BLEA.

BLHP.

BLRE.,

BPB.

CIG.
CTE.

DAA.

DEI.

C.—Macan’s edition of the Shahnama

L.—Lumsden’s Do.
P.—Mohl’s do.
T.—Tihran do.
V.—Vullers’ dc.

The Voiage and Travayle of Sir John Maundeville, Knight
. . . Edited . . . by John Ashton.

The Shah Nameh cf... Firdausi. Translated and
abridged. . . . By James Atkinson Esq.

A History of Ancient Geography. By E. H. Bunbury
E.R.G.S.

A Plain and Literal Translation of the Arabian Nights’
Entertainments. . . . By Richard F. Burton.

Buddhist Records of the Western World. Translated
from the Chinese of Hiuen Tsiang (A.D. 629). By
Samuel Beal.

The Chahar Maqala (‘‘ Four Disccurses”’) of Nidhami-i-
’Arudi-i-Samarquandi. Translated into English by
Edward G. Browne, M.A., M.B.

The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.
By Edward Gibbon. Edited by J. B. Bury, M A.

The History of Alexander the Great, being the Syriac
Version of the Pseudo-Callisthenes. Edited . . . with
an English Translation and Notes, by Ernest A. Wallis
Budge, M.A.

The Life and Exploits of Alexander the Great, being a
Series of Translations of the Ethiopic Histories of
Alexander. .. . By E. A. Wallis Budge, M.A.

A Literary History of Persia. By Edward G. Browne,
M.A.

History cf the Lower Roman Empire. By J. B. Bury.

Photius: Bibliotheca. Ex Recensione Immanuelis Bek-
keri.

Corpus Inscriptionum Graecarum.

Theophanis Chronographia. Ex Recensione Ioannis
Classeni.

Arriani Anabasis . . . F. Dibner.

Arriani Indica . . . F. Dibner.

J. Darmesteter, Etudes Iraniennes.

135
136

GENERAL LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

DFIKHP. History of the Parsis. By Dcsabhai Framji Karaka,

DHA
DZ
EHI.
BE

GDF.

GH
GHP.
GIP.
GKS.
GZ.

HAP.
HB.

HEP:

HIE.

HLP.
HOC

HRVP.

HS.
JEB.
JP.
JRGS.
1
KA.
KUR.
LAN.

LEC.

Csak

The History of Antiquity. From the German of Professor
Max Duncker. By the late Evelyn Abbot, M.A.

Professor Darmesteter’s Trans. of the Zandavasta in the
Sacred Books of the East. Reference to Parts! and pages.

The History of India as told by its own Historians. By
Sir H. M. Elliot, K.C.B.

Eastern Persia, an Account of the Journeys cf the Persian
Boundary Commissicn, 1870-71-72.

The History of the Decline and Fall of the Roman Empire.
Py Edward Gibbon, Esq. With Notes by Dean Milman
and M. Guizot. Edited, with additional Notes, by
William Smith, L.L.D.

The Land of the Hittites. . . . By John Garstang, D.Sc.

Histoire des Perses par le Comte de Gobineau.

Grundriss der Iranischen Philologie.

Kleine Schriften von Alfred von Gutschmid.

Geiger: Das Yatkar-i Zariran und sein Verhaltniss zum
Sahname. Sitzungsberichte der philosophisch-philolo-
gischen und historischen Classe der k.b. Akademie der
Wissenschaften zu Miinchen. 1890. Bd. Ii. Heft I.
P- 43-

History of Art in Persia from the French of Georges Perrot
and Charles Chipiez.

The Country of Balochistan. ... By A. W. Hughes,
F.R.G.S.

Essays on the Sacred Language, Writing and Religion of
the Parsis. By Martin Haug, Ph. D. Edited and
enlarged by E. W. West, Ph. D.

The Indian Empire. By W. W. Hunter, C.S.I., C.LE.,
L.L.D.

The Legend of Perseus. By E. S. Hartland.

Q. Curtius Rufus . . . ed. Edmundus Hedicke.

Veterum Persarum ... Religionis Historia. Ed. 2nd.
By Thomas Hyde.

Syntagma Dissertationum quas olim auctor doctissimus
Thomas Hyde S.T.P. separatim edidit.

The earliest English version of the Fables of Bidpai. . .
now again edited and induced by Joseph Jacobs.

Persia Past and Present, by Professor A. V. Williams
Jackson.

The Journal of the Royal Geographical Society.

Zoroaster. By A. V. Williams Jackson.

Asia. By A. H. Keane, F.R.G.S.

Kitab-i-Yamini of Al Utbi. Translated by the Rev.
James Reynolds, B.A.

The Arabian Nights’ Entertainments. A New Translation
from the Arabic. . . . By Edward William Lane.

The Lands of the Eastern Caliphate. By G. Le Strange.

1The second edition of Part I. is referred to unless otherwise specified.
GENERAL LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS 137

LPC. A View of the History and Coinage of the Parthians. By
John Lindsay, Esq.
MA. Alexandre le Grand . . . Par Paul Meyer.
MCAI. Ancient India as described by Megasthenes and Arrian.
. By J. W. M’Crindle, M.A.

MCI. The Invasion of India by Alexander the Great. . . . By
J. W. M’Crindle, M.A. . . . New Edition.

MPF. Reliqua Arriani et Scriptorum de rebus Alexandri M.
Fragmenta collegit . . . Carolus Miller.

MGN. Narrative of a Journey through the Province of Khorassan,

etc. By Colonel C. M. MacGregor, C.S.I., C.1.E.
MHP. History of Persia. By Sir John Malcolm, G.C.B.

MLM. The Life of Muhammad. By William Muir, Esq.

MM. Macoudi: Les Prairies d’Or. Texte et traduction par C
Barbier de Meynard et Pavet de Courteille.

MPC. Pseudo-Callisthenes, primum edidit Carolus Mullerus.

MSJP. A Second Journey through Persia, etc. By James Morier
Esq.

MZA. Rev. L. H. Mills’ Trans. of the Zandavasta in the
Sacred Books of the East. Reference to Part and

pages.

NAR. Beitrage zur Geschichte des Alexanderromans, von Prof.
Dr. Th. Nédldeke in Denkschriften der . . . Akademie
der Wissenschaften . . . Wien, 1890.

NIN. Das Iranische Nationalepos von Theodor Néldeke.

NK. Geschichte des ArtachSir i Papakan aus dem Pellewi iiber-
setzt . . . von Th. Néldeke.

NES: Néldeke: Persische Studien. II. Sitzungsberichte der
Kaiserlichen Akademie der Wissenschaften. CXXVI.
Band.

NSEH. Sketches from Eastern History. By Theodor Ndldeke.
English Translation.

NT. Geschichte der Perser und Araber zur Zeit der Sasaniden

. . von Th. Ndldeke.

OHS. The History of the Saracens. By Simon Ockley. Fourth
Edition.

RFGM. The Five Great Monarchies of the Ancient Eastern Werld.
By George Rawlinson, M.A.

RH. The History of Herodotus. . . . By George Rawlinson,
M.A.

RK. The Koran translated from the Arabic. By J. M. Rodwell.
Second Edition.

RM. (In Vols. III and IV) The Mahabharata translated into

English Prose (by Kisari Mohan Ganguli). Published by
Pratapa Chandra Rai, C.1.E.
(Elsewhere) The Rauzat-us-safa ; or, Garden of Purity. . .
By ... Mirkhond . . . Translated by E. Rehatsek.
RP. (In Vols. I and V) Records of the Past. First Series.
(Elsewhere) Professor Rawlinson’s Parthia in the Story of
the Nations’ Series.
138

RPNS.

RSM.
SAC.
SHC.
SK.
SM.
SE:
STD:
WLS.
WPR.
WPT.
YMP.

Zale

GENERAL LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS

Records of the Past. Second Series.

The Seventh Great Oriental Monarchy. By George Raw-
linson, M.A.

The Chronology of Ancient Nations . . . of Albiruni .. .
translated . . . by Dr. C. Edward Sachau.

The “ Higher Criticism ’’ and the Verdict of the Monu-
ments. By the Rev. A. H. Sayce.

The Koran ... Translated . . . by George Sale, Gent.

History of the Early Kings of Persia . . . Translated from
the original . . . Persian of Mirkhond ... by David
Shea.

The Periplus of the Erythraean Sea . . . Translated from
the Greek and annotated by Wilfrid H. Schoff, A.M.

The Dabistan . .. Translated . . . by David Shea and
Anthony Troyer.
In the Land of the Lion and Sun . . . By C. J. Wills, M.D.

The Parsi Religion. By John Wilson.

Dr. E. W. West’s Trans. of the Pahlavi Texts in the Sacred
Books of the East. Reference to Parts and pages.

The Book of Sir Marco Polo ... newly translated... .
By Colonel Henry Yule, C.B.

Chronique de Abou-Djafar-Mo’hammed-Ben-Djarir-Ben-
Yezid Tabari, traduite . . . Par M. Hermann Zotenburg.
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

VOLUME I Vol. I

PREFACE .

INTRODUCTION
CHAPTER I[.—LAND AND PEOPLE
CHAPTER IJ.—POET AND POEM
CHAPTER III.—TEXT AND TRANSLATION

LIsT OF PREVIOUS TRANSLATORS
ANCIENT PERSIAN CALENDAR
GENEALOGICAL TABLES
ABBREVIATIONS 5
NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION .

THE SHAHNAMA
THE PRELUDE—
SECT.
I. Invocation
. Discourse in Praise os suiediona
. Of the Making of the World
. Of the Nature of Man
. Of the Nature of the Sun
Of the Nature of the Moon.
In Praise of the Prophet and his Companions
. On the Compilation of the Shahnama .
. Of the Poet Dakiki
. How the present Book was begun :
. In Praise of Abii Mansur, Son of Rieheranad
. In Praise of Sultan Mahmud

”
mr OW”) SI AnH WhN

-

al
nN

THE BEGINNING OF THE HISTORY: THE
PISHDADIAN DYNASTY
kta

. The Greatness of Gaiimart and the Envy of

Ahbriman 7

. How Siyamak was slain by the Div :
3. How Hiushang and Gaiimart went to fight the
Black Div . ; . :

139

PAGE

vil

I0o
IOI
102
104
105
105
106
108
109
109
IIo
I12

118
120

I2!I
140

SECT.

GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

HusHANG—

VoL. I

1. The Accession of Hushang and his civilising Arts .

oP

How the Feast of Sada was founded

TAHMURAS—
1. Tahmuras ascends the Throne, invents new Arts,

Jamsufp—

ON

>

ZAHHAK—
1

Ww

Faripin—

+

bwWhN

-
OO ON OM

rite
12.
13.

T4.
Ts
16.
Wife
18.
LO.
20.

subdues the Divs, and dies

. The Greatness and Fall of Jamshid

. The Story of Zahhak and his Father

. How Iblis turned Cook .

. How the Fortunes of Jamshid went to Wrack

The evil Customs of Zahhak and the Device of
Irma’il and Karma’il

. How Zahhak saw aan ina Deane i
. The Birth of Faridtin
. How Faridin questioned his Mother about his

Origin
The Story of Zahhak and Kee the Smith
How Faridin went to Battle with Zahhak

. How Faridtn saw the Sisters of Jamshid ;
. The Story of Faridin and the Minister of Zahhak.
. How Faridtin bound Zahhak ° .

. How Faridun ascended the Throne
. How Fariduin sent Jandal to Yaman .

How the King of Yaman answered Jandal

How the Sons of Faridin went to the King of
Yaman :

How Sarv proved the Sons of Faridiin. by Sorcery.

. How Faridtin made Trial of his Sons :
. How Faridun divided the World among his Sons .
. How Salm grew envious of fraj : :
. How Salm and Tur sent a Message to Faridin

. How Faridin made Answer to his Sons

How fraj went to his Brothers

How fraj was slain by his Brothers

ae Faridin received Tidings of the Murder of
raj .

Howa Daughter was born to fraj

The Birth of Minichihr :

How Salm and Tur had Tidings of Mintichihr

How Faridtn received his Sons’ Message. :

How Faridin made Answer to his Sons ;

How Faridun sent Minuchihr to fight Tur and Salm

How Mintchihr attacked the Host of Tur

PAGE

ee

123

126

130
135
137
139

145
147
150

152
154
159
161
164

“166

174
177
T8I

183
184
186
189
189
1gi
193
197
199

202
205
206
208
209
211
215
218
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 141

Fariptn (continued) Vor
SECT. PAGE
21. How Tur was slain by Minuchihr c 2z0
22. How Minuchihr wrote to announce his Victory to
Faridin . , -§ 221
23. How Karan took the Castle of the Alans : 223
24. How Kakwi, the Grandson of Zahhak, attacked the
franians : ve 2a5
25. How Salm fled and was slain by Mindchihr ; 227
26. How the Head of Salm was sent to Faridun . 229
27. The Death of Faridin 232
MINUCHIHR—
1. How Minitchihr ascended the Throne and made an
Oration. . . : : C a BAG
2. The Birth of Zal ; 239
3. How Sam had a Dream touching the Case of his Son 243
4. How Mintchihr took Knowledge of the Case of Sam
and Zal , : : - 248
5. How Zal went back to Zabulistan : 3 oh PAG
6. How Sam gave the Kingdom to Zal_.. : 253
7. How Zal visited Mihrab of Kabul : : = 250
8. How Rudaba took Counsel with her Damsels =) 259
9. How Rudaba’s Damsels went to see Zal ‘ eZ03
10. How the Damsels returned to Rudaba. : = 207,
11. How Zal went to Rudaba . 270
12. How Zal consulted the Archimages in 1 the Matter
of Rudaba : : ya 273
13. How ZAal wrote to Sam to explain the Case ; 275
14. How Sam consulted the Archmages in the Matter
of Zal : ez7O
15. How Sindukht heard of the Case Er Riiddba . : . 280

16. How Mihrab was made aware of his Daughter’s
Case : 284

17- How Mintchihr heard. of the ‘Case ‘of ZAl and
Rudaba . : : é : 2 SO
18. How Sam ceme to Maendeniie ‘ : : 7 e259
19. How Sam went to fight Mihrab . . e2O2
20. How Zal went on a Mission to Minichihr . Tee 5
21. How Mihrab was wroth with Sindukht : 2 E2Q9
22. How Sam comforted Sindukht . a 300.
23. How Zal came to Mintchihr with Sami s Letter 3300
24. How the Archmages questioned Zal _. : 7 308
25. How Zal answered the Archmages : 309

26. How Zal displayed his oe nent ‘be fore
Mintchihr. 311
27. Mintchihr’s Answer to Sm’ Ss Letter ; ‘ ~ 34
28. How Zal came to Sam z : : west
29. The Story of the Birth of Rustam : : 7 eszo
30. How SAm came tosee Rustam . : oes

31. How Rustam slew the White Elephant : » 327,
142

GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

MINUCHIHR (continued) VOLSale
sEcT PAGE
32. How Rustam went to Mount Sipand 330
33. How Rustam wrote a Letter announcing his
Victory to Zal 332
34. The Letter of Zal to Sam 334
35. Minuchihr’s last Counsels to his Son 335
NauDAR—
1. How Naudar succeeded to the Throne. 339
2. How Pashang heard of the Death of Minuchihr 342
3. How Afrasiyab came to the Land of fran 345
4. How Barman and Kubad fought together and how
Kubad was slain 340
5. How Afrasiyab fought with Naudar the second
Time 350
6. How Naudar fought with Afrasiyab the third Tame 352
7. How Naudar was taken by Afrasiyab . ESS
8. How Wisa found his Son that had been slain 356
9. How Shamasas and Khazarwan invaded: Zabu-
listan : 358
10. How Zal came to help Mihréb 359
11. How Naudar was slain by Afrasiyab 362
12. How Zal had Tidings of the Death of Naudar 3604
13. How Ighriras was slain by his Brother. 367
ZAv—
1. Zav is elected Shah 370
GaARSHASP—
1. How Garshasp succeeded to the Throne and died,
and how Afrasiyab invaded fran 374
2. How Rustam caught Rakhsh . 378
3. How Zal led the Host against AfrasiyAb 381
4. How Rustam ee Kai Kubad from Mount
Alburz p pemooe
INDEX 389
VOLUME II
PAGE
GENEALOGICAL TABLES 3
ABBREVIATIONS. j 5
NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION . 6
THE KAIANIAN DYNASTY
Kar KuBAp—
SECT. PAGE
1. How Kai Kubad ascended the Throne and warred
against Turan . 11
2. How Rustam fought with AfrasiyAb 13
3. How Afrasiyab came to his Father : 16
4. How Pashang sued to Kai Kubad for Peace . 18
5. How Kai Kubad came to Istakhr of Pars 22
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 143
Kat KAUs— VoL. II
Part I. THE War witH MAzANDARAN—
SECT. PAGE
1. The Prelude 29
2. How Kaus sat upon the Throne and was tempted
to invade Mazandaran. 30
3. How Zal gave Counsel to Kaus . 30
4. How Kats went to Mazandaran. : 38
5. The Message of Kai Kaus to Zal and Rustam 42
THE SEVEN COURSES OF RUSTAM—
6. The First Course. How Rakhsh fought with a
Lion . oar: : c need
7. The Second Course. “How Rustam found a Spring 46
8. The Third Course. How Rustam fought with a -
Dragon s : : : ; ets
g. The Fourth Course. How Rustam slew a Witch . 50
10. The Fifth Course. How Rustam took Ulad cap-
tives. : : : . : : 52
ie NNER SEXED Course. How Rustam fought with the
Div Arzhang ; ; : : : 57
12. The Seventh Course. How Rustam slew the
White Div . : 59
13. How Kaus wrote to the King of Mazandaran 63
14. How Rustam went on an Embassy to the King of
Mazandaran : 66
15. How Kats fought with the ‘King of Mazandaran 70
16. How Kaus returned to the Land of fran and fare-
welled Rustam : . : 70
Part IJ. THE Dorncs oF Kar KAUts IN THE LAND
OF BARBARISTAN AND OTHER TALES—
1. How Kai Kaus warred with the King of Hama-
varan 82
2. How Kaus asked to Wife SidAba, the Daughter
of the King of Hamavaran 86
3. How the King of Hamavaran made Kats Prisoner 88
4. How Afrasiyab invaded the Land of fran SPO
5. How Rustam sent a Message to the King of Ham-
avaran : 93
6. How Rustam fought ‘with Three Kings and deliv-
ered Kaus . , ; 95
7. How Kats sent a Message to AfrsiyAb 98
8. How Kaus ordered the World . 101
9. How Kats beguiled by Iblis ascended the Sky 102
10. How Rustam brought back Kats 104
THE STORY OF THE FIGHT OF THE SEVEN WARRIORS—
11. How Rustam went with the Seven Warriors to the
Hunting-ground of Afrasiyab 107

12,

How Rustam fought with the Turanians

It!
144

GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

Kart KAUs—
Part Il. THE STORY OF THE FIGHT OF THE SEVEN WARRIORS

(continued )— Vora ut
SECT. PAGE
13. How Pilsam fought with the [ranians . 112
14. How Afrasiyab fled from the Battlefield 116
Part III. SuHRAB—
1. The Prelude ; 119
2. How Rustam went to the Chace. 120
3. How Rustam came to the City of Samangan 122
4. How Tahmina, the Daughter of the King of Saman-
gan, came to Rustam : 123
5. The Birth of Suhrab. , 126
6. How Suhrab chose his Charger ; 127
7. How Afrasiyab sent Barman and Himan to SuhrAb 129
8. How Suhrab came to White Castle 131
9. How Suhrab fought with Gurdafrid 132
10. The Letter of Gazhdaham to Kaus 130
11. How Suhrab took White Castle . 137
12. How Kaus wrote to Rustam and summoned him
from Zabulistan . ‘ 138
13. How Kats was wroth with Rustam : 142
14 How Kaus and Rustam led forth the Host 148
15. How Rustam slew Zhanda Razm 149
16. How Suhrab asked Hajir the Names of the ‘Chiets
of fran ; BS LG
17. How Suhrab attacked the Army of KAtis 159
18. How Rustam fought with Suhrab 162
19. How Rustam and. Suhrab returned to Camp. 165
20. How Suhrab overthrew Rustam. 168
21. How Suhrab was slain by Rustam 172
22. How Rustam asked Kaus for an Elixir. a
23. How Rustam lamented for Suhrab 179
24. How Rustam returned to Zabulistan . : 182
25. How Suhrab’s Mother received the Tidings of his
Death 184
Part IV. THE Story oF StyAwuSH—
1. The Prelude ‘ 191
2. The Story of the Mother of Siyawush 3 193
3. The Birth of Siyawush 195
4. How Siyawush arrived from ZAbulistén 197
5. The Death of the Mother of SiyAwush. 199
6. How Sidaba fell in Love with Siyawush 200
7. How Siyawush visited Sidaba . 202
8. How Siyawush visited the Bower the Seco Time 206
9g. How Siyawush visited the Bower the third Time 210
10. How Stdaba beguiled Kaus 211
It. How Stdaba and a Sorceress devised a ‘Scheme 214
12. How Kaus inquired into the Matter of the Babes. 215
13. How Siyawush passed through the Fire 5 ei!
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

Kar KAts—

Part IV. THE Story or StyAwusu (continued)—-

SECT.
14.
15.

. How Siyawush led forth the Host

. The Letter of Siyawush to Kai Kats .

. The Answer of Kai Kats to the Letter of SiyAw ush

. How Afrasiyab had a Dream and was afraid.

. How Afrasiyab inquired of the Sages concerning

VOL.

ae)

nN nN
AN Of WN

i) N

be oh

56.
. How Piran saved Farangis

Ix

How Siyawush begged Stidaba’s Life of his Father
How Kaus heard of the Coming of eae?

his Dream .

. How Afrasiyab took Counsel with the Nobles

. How Garsiwaz came to Siyawush °

. How Siyawush made a Treaty with Afrasiy Ab

. How Siyawush sent Rustam to Kaus

. How Rustam gave the Message to Kats

. How Kaus sent Rustam to Sistan

. The Answer of Kats to the Letter of Sipawuck

. How Siyawush took Counsel with Bahram and Zanga
. How Zanga went to Afrasiyab

. How Afrasiyab wrote to Siyawush

. How Siyawush gave up the Host to Bahram.

. The Interview ot Siyawush with Afrasiyab

. How Siyawush displayed his Prowess_ betoie

Afrasiyab

. How Afrasiyab and Siyawush went to the Chase

. How Piran gave his Daughter to Siyawush

. How Piran spake to Siyawush about Farangis

. How Piran spake with Afrasiyab .

. The Wedding of Farangis and Siyawush

. How Afrasiyab bestowed a Province on Siydwush.

. How Siyawush built Gang-dizh 5

. How Siyawush discoursed with Piran about the

Future

. How Afrasiyab sent Piran into the Provinces

. How Siyawush built Siyawushgird

. How Piran visited Siyawushgird :

. How Afrasiyab sent Garstwaz to Siyawush .

. The Birth of Fartd, the Son of Siyawush

. How Siyawush played at Polo P

. How Garsiwaz returned and spake Evil before

Afrasiyab . ; : 5

. How Garsiwaz returned to ‘SiyAwush

. The Letter of Siyawush to Afrasiyab

. How Afradsiyab came to fight with Siyaw ush

. How Siyawush had a Dream

. The Parting Words of Siyawush to Farangts.

. How Siyawush was taken by Afrasiyab . ;
. How Farangis bewailed herself helices eee :

How Siyawush was slain by Gurwi

VOL.
PAGE

145

I]

222
224
226
229
230
232

234
235
238
239
242
243
246
247
249
252
255
257
261

263
267
268
270
22
274
276
279

282
285
285
287
289

292

296
301
306
397
308
310
312
317
320
323
140 GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS
Kar KAtus—
Part IV. THE Story oF StyAwusH (continued)— Vor. ir
SECT. PAGE
58. The Birth of Kai Khusrau 325
59. How Piran entrusted Kai Khusrau to the Shep-
herds 328
60. How Piran brought Kai Khusrau before AfrasiyAb 330
61. How Kai Khusrau went to Siyawushgird 333
Part V. How RUSTAM AVENGED SIYAWUSH AND HOW
Gtv BRrouGHT Kat Kuusrau to frRAn—
1. Firdausi’s Lament over his old Age 336
2. How Kaus heard of the Case of Siyawush 337
3. How Rustam came to Kaus . 338
4. How Rustam slew Stidaba and led forth the Host. 340
5. How Faramarz slew Warazad . - S4n
6. How Surkha led his Troops to fight with Rustam S44
7. How Afrasiyab led forth the Host to ee his
Son . ; 348
8. How Pilsam was slain by Rustam 350
9g. How Afrasiyab fled from Rustam 353
10. How Afrasiyab sent Khusrau to Khutan 355
11. How Rustam reigned over Turan for Seven Years. 357
12. How Zawara went to the Hunting-ground of
Siyawush 59
13. How Rustam haeried: the Land of TuirAn 360
14. How Rustam returned to [ran ‘ 361
15. How Gudarz had a Dream of Kai Khusrau 7 363
16. How Giv went to Turan in Ouest of Kai Khusrau. 365
17. The Finding of Kai Khusrau 369
18. How Giv and Kai Khusrau went to SiyAwushgird . 373
19. How Kai Khusrau won Bihzad . 5 374
20. How Farangis went with Kai Khusrau and Giv to
fran . 377
21. How Kulbad and Nastihan fled from Giv 378
22. How Piran pursued Kai Khusrau 380
23. How Piran contended with Giv . 382
24. How Piran was taken by Giv 385
25. How Farangis delivered Piran from Giv 386
26. How Afrasiyab found Piran on the Way 388
27. How Giv disputed with the Toll-man . 390
28. How Kai Khusrau crossed the Jihun 392
29. How Kai Khusrau came to Ispahan 394
30. How Kai Khusrau came to Kats 397
31. How Tus refused Allegiance to Kai Khusrau. 399
2. How Gidarz was wroth with Tus 402
33. How Gudarz and Tits went before Kats on the
Matter of the Kingship 403
34. How Tus and Faramarz went to the Castle of
Bahman and came back foiled 405
35. How Kai Khusrau went to the Castle of Bahman

and took it

406
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 147

Kar KAts—
Part V. How Rustam AvENGED SryAwusu, etc. (continued)—

Vor
SECT. PAGE
36. How Kai Khusrau returned in Triumph : aL 400
37. How Kaus set Khusrau upon the Throne of King-
ship . : : : : : , a eaiTaL
INDEX . ; : ; 2 : ; ; ; 4s
VOLUME III
PAGE
ABBREVIATIONS. x : : 5 : f ; 2 3
NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION : : : : : 4
THE KAIANIAN DYNASTY (continued)
Kar KHusrau—
Part I. How Kat Kuusravu, TO AVENGE SIYAWUSH,
SENT A Host aGaInst TURAN—
SECT.
1. The Prelude . : 15
2. How the Nobles did Homage to Kei Khusrau 5 17
3. How Kai Khusrau made a Progress through his
Realm : 19
4. How Kai Khusrau sware “to Kai KaAts to take
Vengeance on Afrasivab . : og eZO
5. How Kai Khusrau numbered the Paladins : : 24
6. How Kai Khusrau bestowed Treasures on the
Paladins . 26
7. How Kai Khusrau sent Rustam to the Land ot
Hind a 2 5 30
8. How Kai Khusrau reviewed the Host’. : : 31
THE STorY OF FarUp THE Son oF StvAWUSH—
9. The Prelude . : A : : ; 37
10. How Tis went to Turkistan : : : 38
11. How Fartid heard of the Coming of Tus : 4 i
12. How Fartid and Tukhar went to view the Host. 44
13. How Bahram came to Fartid upon the Mountain . 47
14. How Bahram went back to Tus ; : : 51
15. How Rivniz was slain by Fartid : : : 2
16. How Zarasp was slain by Farid : . eos
17. How Tus fought with Farid : : : : 54
18. How Giv fought with Farid : : 3 : 57
19. How Bizhan fought with Farud. ; c TO
20. How Farid was slain : : : ; 5 62
21. How Jarira slew herself. : 66
22. How Tus led the Host to the Kasa Rid, and how
Palashan was slain by Bizhan : : Oo
23. How the franians suffered in a Snowstorm . : 7
24. How Bahram captured Kabida : : : 73
25. How the [franians fought with Tazhav ; : 75

20. How Afrasiyab had Tidings of Tis and his Host . 78
148

GENERAL -TABEE. OF CONTENTS

Kat Kuusrau—
THE STORY OF FARUD THE SON OF SIyAwusH (continued)—

Vor. TE
SECT. PAGE
27. How Piran made a Night-attack on the [ranians 80
28. How Kai Khusrau recalled Tiis 84
29. How Fariburz asked a Truce of Piran . : 87
30. How the [ranians were defeated by the Turkmans. 89
31. How Bahram returned to look for his ne ee.
the Battlefield : 95
32. How Bahram was slain by Tazhav 98
33. How Giv slew Tazhav in revenge for Bahram 101
34. How the franians went back to Khusrau 104
Part II. THE story oF KAmUs oF KasHAN—
1. The Prelude 110
2. How Khusrau reviled Tas. pata
3. How Khusrau pardoned the franians 113
4. How Khusrau sent Tus to Turan 115
5. The Message of Piran to the Army of fran 117
6. How Afrasiyab sent an Army to Piran. 118
7. How Tus slew Arzhang 119
8. How Human fought with Tus 120
9g. How the franians and Turanians fought the second
Time : 125
10. How the Turanians used Sorcery against the Host
of fran : REZO
11. How the franians retreated to Mount Haman 131
12. How the Host of Turan beleaguered Mount
Hamawan : 132
13. How Piran went in Pursuit of the “‘franians to
Mount Hamawan 137
14. How the franians made a Night- attack 139
15. How Kai Khusrau had Tidings of his Host 142
16. How Fariburz asked to Wife Farangis, the Mother
of Kai Khusrau ; : > 046
17. How Tis saw Siyawush ina Dream : 149
18. How Afrasiyab sent the Khan and Kamus to help
Piran 151
19. How the Khan of Chin came to Praaneeen 153
20. How the franians took Counsel how te act 155
21. How Gudarz had Tidings of the Coming of Rustam 156
22. How the Khan of Chin went to reconnoitre the
Army of fran 160
23. How Fariburz reached Mount Hemera 163
24. How Piran took Counsel with the Khan of Chin 164
25. How Giv and Tis fought with Kamus. 168
26. The Coming of Rustam 170
27. How the franians and Turanians arrayed their
Hosts : 174
28. How Rustam fought with Ashkabis 179
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 149

Kat KHusrau—
Part IJ. THE Story or KAmUus oF KAsHAN (continued)— Voc. III

SECT. PAGE
29. How Piran held Converse concerning the re
of Rustam A 182
30. How the [ranians and Piranians set the Battle in
Array ‘ : : : 4185
31. How Alwa was slain by KAmis : : : SL 7
32. How Kamts was slain. by Rustam : ; . 188
Part III. Tur Story oF RUSTAM AND THE KHAN OF
Cuin—
1. How the Khan of Chin had Tidings of the ae
of Kamus . 5 ig2
2. How Chingish fared with Rustam . - 194
3. How the Khan of Chin sent Hitman to Rustam - 196
4. How Piran took Counsel with Himan and the
Khan ‘ : , s - 199
5. How Piran came to Ragin : zor
6. How the Turanians took Counsel for ‘Battle with
the franians : : : =) 1206
7- How Rustam harangued his Troops : ei
8. How the franians and Turdanians set the Battle in
Array : : : : Sens
9. How Rustam reproached Piran : : . eee
10. How the Battle was joined - 219
11. How Shangul fought with Rustam and fled . E22
12. How Rustam fought with Sawa. . : 7223
13. How Rustam slew Gahar of Gahan. : 22
14. How the Khan was taken Prisoner. 22
15. How the Host of the Turanians was defeated 3) 250
16. How Rustam divided the Spoil . : =e? 32
17. How Rustam wrote a Letter to Kai Khusrau m2 ST
18. How Kai Khusrau made Answer to Rustam’s
Letter : 239
19. How Afrasiyab Hadi Tidings ee the eee iG ee
Army : a 24k

20. How Rustam fought with KaAfar the Man- eater 7 243
21. How Afrasiyab had Tidings of the as of

Rustam *. en ZAG
22. Afrasiydb’s Letter to Putdwand 3 : aA.
23. How Puiladwand fought with Giv and Tus . LZ
24. How Rustam fought with Piladwand . : - 259
25. The Wrestling of Rustam and Piladwand . a2 02
26. How Afrasiyab fled from Rustam : - 265

27. How Rustam returned to the Court of the Shah e2G7
28. How Rustam went back to Sistan 5 : =) 200

Part JV. THE Story oF THE FIGHT OF RUSTAM
WITH THE Div AKWAN—
1. Prelude . : : : ; ; : eer

nN
150

Kar KHuUsSRAU—

GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

Wort. JUAL

Part IV. THE STORY OF THE FIGHT OF RusTAM, etc. (continued)—
SECT.

PART V.

INDEX

>

OV new

on] oO abwWhN He

How IKthusrau summoned Rustam to fight the
Div Akwan

. How Rustam went in Quest of eRe Dive Z
. How the Div Akwan flung Rustam into the Sea
. How Afrasiyab came tc inspect his Steeds, and

how Rustam slew the Div Akwan.

. How Rustam went back to the Land of fran.

THE STORY OF BizHAN AND ManfzHa—

; whe Prelude :

. How the Irmanians appealed to Khusrau
. How Bizhan went to fight the wild Boars
. How Gurgin beguiled Bizhan

How Bizhan went to see Manizha, Daughter of
Afrasiyab

. How Bizhan went to He Tent of Warton
. How Manizha carried off Bizhan to her Palace

How Garsiwaz brought Bizhan before Afrasiyab
How Piran begged Bizhan’s Life from Afrasiyab

. How Afrasiyab put Bizhan in Ward .

. How Gurgin returned to fran and lied about Bizhan
. How Giv brought Gurgin before Khusrau

. How Kai Khusrau saw Bizhan in the Cup that

showed the World
4. “How Khusrau wrote a Letter to Rustam

. How Giv bore the Letter of Kai Khusrau Ae

Rustam

. How Rustam made a ‘Feast for Giv

. How Rustam came to Khusrau .

. How Kai Khusrau held Feast with the Paladins

. How Rustam made Petition for Gurgin to the Shah
. How Rustam equipped his Escort

. How Rustam went to the City of Khutan to Piran
. How Manizha came before Rustam

. How Bizhan heard of the Coming of Rustam

. How Rustam took Bizhan out of the Pit

. How Rustam attacked the Palace of Afrasiyab by

Night

. How Afrasiyab went to fight with Rustam
. How Afrasiyab was defeated by the [ranians
. How Rustam returned to Kai Khusrau

29. How Kai Khusrau made a Feast.

VOLUME IV

ABBREVIATIONS.
NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION

PAGE

318
319

321

344

347
349
351
353
355
359

PAGE
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS
THE KAIANIAN DYNASTY (continued)

Kal KHUuUSRAU (conlinued)—

Part VI.

THE BATTLE OF THE TWELVE RUKHS—

SECT.

1 ;
. How Afrasiyab called together his Host ,
. How Kai Khusrau sent Guidarz to fight the Tur-

The Prelude

anians

. How Giv was made the Bearer a Ov eantes om

Gudarz to Piran .

. How Givy visited Piran at Wisagird

. The Arraying of the Hosts.

. How Bizhan went to Giv to urge him to fight

. How Human asked Piran for Leave to fight .

. How Human challenged Ruhham

. How Human challenged Fariburz

. How Human challenged Guidarz. ;

. How Bizhan heard of the Doings of Human.

. How Giv gave the Mail of Siyawush to Bizhan

. How Human came to battle with Bizhan

. How Human was slain by Bizhan

. How Nastihan made a Night-attack and was slain
. How Gudarz asked aid of Khusrau

. The Answer of Khusrau to the letter of Gidarz

. How Khusrau arrayed the Host.

. How Piran wrote to Gidarz Son of KishwAd.

. The Answer of Giidarz to the Letter of Piran.

. How Piran asked Succour from Afrasiyab

. The Answer of Afrasiyab to the Letter of Piran

. How the franians and Turanians fought a ae

Battle

. How Giv fought with Piran and how Giv’ s “Horse

jibbed

. How Giudarz and Piran “arranged a Battle of

Eleven Rukhs

. How Piran harangued his Men of Name
. How Giudarz and Piran chose the Warriors for ihe

Battle of the Eleven Rukhs

. How Fariburz fought with Kulbad

. How Giv fought with Gurwi

. How Guraza fought with Siyamak

. How Furthil fought with Zangula

. How Ruhham fought with Barman

. How Bizhan fought with Ruin

. How Hajir fought with Sipahram

. How Gurgin fought with Andariman

. How Barta fought with Kuhram

8. How Zanga, Son of Shawaran, fought with Akhast
. How Gidarz fought with Piran . ;

88
93

95

99

99
100
IOI
102
102
103
104
105
105
106
152

Kart Kyuusrau— VOL.

GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

Part VI. THE BATTLE OF THE TWELVE RUKHS (continued)—

SECT.
40.
4l.
42.

43-
44.
45:

40.
47:

48.
49-

Part VII.

it ;
2. How Kai Khusrau arrayed his Host against

a

ON AN

16.

7
18.

19,

20.
21.

How Gudarz returned to the Warriors of fran

How Lahhak and Farshidward bewailed Piran

How Lahhak and Farshidward took the Road to
Turan 4

How Gustaham pursued Ty AbhAle and Farshidward

How Bizhan followed after Gustaham.

How Lahhak and Farshidward were slain Eee Gusta-
ham . :

How Bizhan Beneld Gustatam in ete Meade: :

How Kai Khusrau built a Charnel-house for Piran
and for the other Chiefs of Turan, and how he
slew Gurwi the Son of Zira ;

How the Turanians asked Quarter of Kai icnaoran

How Bizhan returned with Gustaham.

THE GREAT WAR OF KAI KHUSRAU WITH
AFRASIYAB—
In Praise of Sultan Mahmiud

Afrasiyab

. How Afrasiyab heard that Piran was slain and

that Kai Khusrau had arrayed his Host.

. How Kai Khusrau had Tidings that Afrasiyab

advanced to fight with him.

. How Shida came before his Father Afrasiyab

How Afrasiyab sent an Embassage to Kai Khusrau
How Kai Khusrau sent an Answer to Afrasiyab

. How Kai Khusrau fought with Shida the Son of

Afrasiyab

. How Shida was slain by rea eee

. How the Battle was joined between the Hosts
fe
12.
1's
T4.
15.

How Afrasiyab fled .

How Kai Khusrau announced his Victory to KAtis

How Afrasiyab went to Gang-bihisht .

How Khusrau crossed the Jihun :

How Kai Khusrau fought with AfrasiyAb the
second Time . :

How Afrasiyab took Refuge in Gang- bihisht

The Letter of Afrasiyab to the Faghfur of Chin

How Kai Khusrau arrived before Gang-bihisht

How Jahn came to Kai Khusrau with an Embas-
sage from Afrasiyab

How Kai Khusrau made Answer to Jahn

How Kai Khusrau fought with Afrasiyab and took
Gang-bihisht : :

22. How Afrasiyab fled from Gang- -bibisht é
23. How Kai Khusrau gave Quarter to the Family of

Afrasiyab

IV

PAGE
109
112

115
117
119

121
123

126
129
132

139

150

157
158
161
168

171
175
177
183
185
186
187

190
193
196
198

200
204

207
2
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 153

Kar Kyusrau—

Part VII. THE GREAT War, ETC. (continued)— VoL. 1V
SECT. PAGE
24. How Kai Khusrau exhorted the [ranians_. eS
25. How Kai Khusrau wrote a Letter with the News
of his Victory to Kai Kaus . 217
26. How Kai Khusrau had Tidings of the Coming of
Afrasiyab with the Host of the Faghfur. x) 209
27. The Message of Afrasiyab to Kai Khusrau . ree 2 21
28. How the [ranians and Tiuranians fought s e228
29. How Afrasiyab made a Night-attack upon Kai
Khusrau and was defzated . : 224
30. How the Faghftr of Chin sent an Envoy to Kai
Khusrau. : 5 3 reo
31. How Afrasiyab crossed the Sea . . 230
32. How Kai Khusrau sent the Prisoners and Treasure
to Kaus with a Letter . . 3 232
33. The Answer of Shah Kaus to the Letter of Khusrau 237
34. The Embassage of Kai Khusrau to the Faghfur of
Chin and the King of Makran 5 238
35. How Kai Khusrau fought with the King of Makré an
and how the King of Makran was slain . a 2An
36. How Kai Khusrau crossed the Sea. 2 7 245
37. How Kai Khusrau reached Gang-dizh. : 247
38. How Kai Khusrau returned from Gang-dizh to
Siyawushgird : 250
39. How Kai Khusrau feniened fot Tiirdn to the
Land of fran. ; 254
40. How Kai Khusrau returned to his Grandsire - 256
41. How Atrasiyab was captured by Hum of the Race
of Faridtn . : x : e259
2. How Afrasiyab escaped from Him : z 7 20u
43. How Kaus and Khusrau came to Him : EO!
44. How Afrasiyab was taken the second Time and
how he and Garsiwaz were slain . . +a 260
45. How Kats and Khusrau returned to Pars. 209
46. The Death of Kai Kats . : 2270
47. How Kai Khusrau fell into Melancholy : = ego
48. How the Nobles inquired why Khusrau had closed
his Court . eS
49. How the franians eiaimoned ZAl and Rustam TT,
50. How Kai Khusrau saw Surtish ina Dream . 250
51. How Zal admonished Kai Khusrau. 262
52. How Kai Khusrau answered Zal. ; ; eZ OA
53. How Zal rebuked Kai Khusrau. , 200
= 54. How Kai Khusrau answered and how Zal excused
himself ; ; 288
55. How Kai Khusrau geve his last Charge to the
franians  . 291
56. How Kai Khusrau appointed Gidarz to be his

Mandatary : : : . : - 294
154 GENERAL.TABLE OF CONTENTS

Kart Kuusrau—

Part VII. THE GREAT WAR, etc. (continued)— Voorn LY,
SECT. PAGE.
57. How Zalasked of Kai Khusraua Patent for Rustam 296
58. How Kai Kausrau gave a Patent to Giv : * 208
59. How Kai Khusrau gave a Patent to Tus. + 299
60. How Kai Khusrau gave the Kingship to Luhrasp. 300
61. How Kai Khusrau farewelled his Women . 304
62. How Kai Khusrau went to the Mountains and
vanished in the Snow . 6 sO
63. How the Paladins were lost in the Snow - 308
64. How Luhrasp had Tidings of the Disappearance
of Kai Khusrau . : 311
LunHrAsP—
1. How Luhrasp built a Fire-temple at Balkh . SO
2. How Gushtasp quitted Luhrasp in Wrath . 2 318
3. How Gushtasp returned with Zarir . : 320
4. How Gushtasp set off for Rim . ei ; 7 328)
5. How Gushtasp arrived in Rum . : aged
6. How a Village-chief entertained Gushtasp ; Peseu,
7. The Story of Katayun the Daughter of Cesar es29
8. How Cesar gave Katayun to Gushtasp : 331
9. How Mirin asked in Marriage Czesar’s second
Daughter . = ; : = 338
10. How Gushtasp slew the Wolf : 337
11. How Ahran asked Cesar’s third Daughter in
Marriage . 342
12. How Gushtasp slew ‘the Dragon and how "Cesar
gave his Daughter to Ahran. : 346
13. How Gushtasp display ed his Prewess upon the
Riding-ground . 349
14. How Cesar ‘wrote to Ilyas oad demamded Tribute. 352
15. How Gushtasp fought with Ilyas and slew him . 355
16. How Cesar demanded from Luhrasp Tribute for
fran . ‘ 356
17. How Zarir carried a Message ‘from “Luhrasp to
Cesar ; 359
18. How Gushtasp returned with Zarir to ‘the Land of
fran and received the Throne from Luhrasp . 361
INDEX : 0 ; : : a 5 : : eS OM
VOLUME V
PAGE
ABBREVIATIONS. ; 7 : ; : : : : 3
NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION . : : : : 2 : 5
THE KAIANIAN DYNASTY (continued)
GusHTAsSPp— ;

Part I. THE ComInGc oF ZARDUHSHT AND THE WAR
WITH ARJASP—
eae
. How Firdausi saw Dakiki in a Dream. 30
. How Luhrasp went to Balkh and Gusht4sp sat
upon the Throne ; . : 31
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

155
GusutTAsP—
Part I. THE ComInG oF ZARDUHSHT, elc. (continued)— VoL. V
SECT. PAGE
3. How Zarduhsht appeared and how Gushtasp
accepted his Evangel . 33
4. How Gushtasp refused to Arjasp the Tribute for
fran . a. a5
5. Hew Arjasp w rote a Letter to GushtAsp 37
6. How Arjasp sent Envoys to Gushtasp. 40
7. How Zarir made Answer to Arjasp ; 42
8. How the Envoys returned to Arjasp with the
Letter of Gushtasp : : : 43
9. How Gushtasp assembled his Troops : 47
10. How Jamasp foretold the Issue of the Battle to
Gushtasp . 48
11. How Gushtasp and ArjAsp array ed their Hosts 54
12. The Beginning of the Battle between the franians
and Turanians, and how Ardshir, Shiru, and
Shidasp were slein 56
13. How Girami, Jamasp’s Son, and ‘Nivzar were slain 58
14. How Zarir, the Brother of Gushtasp, was slain By
Bidirafsh 61
15. How Asfandiyar heard of the Slaying of Zarit 65
16. How Asfandiyar went to Battle with Arjasp 66
17. How Nastur and Asfandiyar slew Bidirafsh. 69
18. How Arjasp fled frcm the Battle 71
19. How the Turkmans received Querter from Asfan-
diyar 72
20. How Gushtasp returned to Balkh : 74
21. How Gushtasp sent Asfandiyar to all the Provinces,
and how the Folk received from him the good
Religion 76
22. How Gurazm spake Evil of Asfandiyar 78
23. How Jamasp came to Asfandiyar 80
24. How Gushtasp imprisoned Asfandiyar. 82
25. How Gushtasp went to Sistan and how ArjAsp
arrayed his Host the second Time. 85
26. The Words of Dakiki being ended, Firdausi
resumeth, praising Shah Mahmud and criti- 87
cising Dakiki
27. How the Host of Arjasp marched to Balkh and 89
how Luhrasp was slain :
28. How Gushtasp heard of the Slaying of Luhrasp and
led his Army toward Balkh . : 93
29. How Gushtasp was put to Flight by Arjasp 96
30. How Jamasp visited Asfandiyar. 98
31. How Asfandiyar saw his Brother Farshidward 103
2. How ss earat came to the Mountain to Gush-
tasp . 106

. How Gushtasp sent ‘Asfandiyér_ the second Time

to fight Arjasp
156 GENERAL TABLE OF CONDENES
GuSsSHTASP— VoL. V
Part IJ. THE STORY OF THE SEVEN STAGES—
SECT. PAGE
1. The Praise of Mahmud the great King. 118

THE SEVEN STAGES OF ASFANDIYAR—

2.

3.

4:

9.

10.
rte
2
13.
14.

15.

PART III.

nN

I
BOO ONAN W

oe
N

~
Ww

i]
>

The First Stage: How Asfandiyar siew two

Wolves ; 3 , : ; ;
The Second Stage: How Asfandiyar slew two
Lions . , : . ; : :
The Third Stage: How Asfandiydr slew a

Dragon

~ the Fourth Stage: How Asfandiyar slew a

Witch

. The Fifth Stage: rice Asfandiyar slew the

Simurgh

. The Sixth Stage: How Asfandiyar passed

through the Snow

. The Seventh Stage: How Asfandiyar crossed the

River and slew Gurgsar.

How Asfandiyar went to the Brazen Hold | in the
Guise of a Merchant

How the Sisters of Asfandiyar recognised him

How Bishitan assaulted the Brazen Hold

How Asfandiyar slew Arjasp

How Asfandiyar slew Kuhram .

How Asfandiyar wrote a Letter to Gustitisp and
his Answer

How Asfandiyar returned to Gushtdsp

THE STORY OF ASFANDIYAR’S FIGHT WITH
RustTamM—

. How Asfandiyar ambitioned the Throne and how

Gushtasp took Counsel with the Astrologers.

. How Asfandiyar demanded the Kingdom from his

Father

. How Gushtasp answ ered his Son
. How Katayun counselled Asfandiyar .

How Asfandiyar led a Host to Zabul

How Asfandiyar sent Bahman to Rustam
How Bahman came to Zal.

How Bahman gave a Message to Rustam
How Rustam made Answer to Asfandiyar .

. How Bahman returned A
. The Meeting of Rustam and AsfandiyAr

How Asfandiyar summoned not Rustam to the
Feast - zs

. How Asfandiyar Ererced hieaselt for Hat summon-

ing Rustam to the Feast

- How ‘Asfandiyar spake Shame of the Race of

Rustam

119
124
125
128
131

134

107

170
172
175
177
179
152
184
187
190
192

196

198
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

7
GusHTAsPp— Vor, V
Part III]. Tae Story oF ASFANDIYAR’S FIGut, efc. (continued)—
SECT, PAGE
15. How Rustam answered Asfandiyar, praising his
own Race and Deeds 202
16. How Asfandiyar boasted of his Ancestry 204
17. How Rustam vaunted his Valour 207
18. How Rustam drank wine with Asfandiyar 210
19. How Rustam returned to his Palace 215
20. How Zal counselled Rustam . 218
21. How Rustam fought with Asfandiyar . : 222
22. How the Sons of Asfandiyar were slain by Zawara
and Faramarz . 225
23. How Rustam fled to the Heights 229
24. How Rustam took Counsel with his Kin 234
25. How the Simurgh succoured Rustam . 235
26. How Rustam went back to fight Asfandiyar. 240
27. How Rustam shot Asfandiyar in the Eyes with an
Arrow 243
28. How Asfandiyér told his last W rishes to Rustam. 247
29. How Bishttan bare the Coffin of es to
Gushtasp e250
30. How Rustam sent Bahman back to fran 256
Part IV. Sat STORY OF RUSTAM AND SHAGHAD
. The Prelude : 201
. How Rustam went to KAbul on behalf ‘of his
Brother Shaghad 263
3. How the King of Kabul dug Pits in the Hunting-
ground and how Rustam and Zawara fell
therein : 268
4. How Rustam slew Shaghad and died 275
5. How Zal received News cf the Slaying of Rustam
and Zawara, and how Faramarz brought their
Coffins and set them in the Charnel-house 273
6. How Faramarz led an Army to avenge Rustam and
slew the King of Kabul : 276
7. How Rudaba lost her Wits through Mourning for
Rustam 278
8. How Gushtasp gave the Kingdom to Bahman and
died . 279
BAHMAN, SON OF ASFANDIYAR—
1. How Bahman sought Revenge for the Death of
Asfandiyar 3 ; 283
2. How Bahman put Zal in Bonds : 285
3. How Faramarz fought with Bahman and was put
to Death S 287
4. How Bahman released Zal and returned to fran 288
5. How Bahman married his own Daughter Humai

and appointed his Successor.
158 GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

HumA1— VoL. V
SECT. PAGE
1. How Humai cast away her Son Darab on the River
Farat in an Ark . ; 7 204
2. How the Launderer brought up Drab. 7 296

3. How Darab questioned the Launderer’s Wife about
his Parentage, and how he fought against the

Rumans , - 300

4. How Rashnawad learned the Case of Darab. mg Oe

5. How Darab fought against the Host of Rim. - 305

6. How Humai rece pnised her Son. : wees Oy,

7- How Humai seated Darab upon the Throne. - 309

INDEX : 5 c - : c : 5 : a2 6303

VOLUME VI

GENEALOGICAL TABLE OF THE SASANIANS ape
ABBREVIATIONS. 5
NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION 8
THE KAIANIAN DYNASTY (concluded)
ae
. How Darab built the City of Darabgird : ZO
2. How Darab defeated the Host of Shu’ib : 21
3 How Darab fought with Failakus and took to W ife
his Daughter : 22
4. How Darab sent back the Daughter of Failakis
to Rum, and how Sikandar was born . G25
DARA, Son oF DARAB—
1. How Dara harangued the Chiefs and took Order
for the Realm . F 34
2. The Death of Failakis and Sikandar’s Accession
tc the Throne. : : : 35
3. How Sikandar went as fe own Ambassador to
Dara 38
4. How Dara fought Ww ith Sikandar ‘and was W orsted. 2

5. How Dara fought with Sikandar the second Time. 43
6. How Sikandar fought with Dara the third Time,

and how Dara fled to Kirman : 4 O
7. How Dara wrote to Sikandar to propose Peace - 49
8. How Dara was slain by his Ministers. 50

9. How Dara told his last Wishes to Saeidar and
died . : : : 52
10. How Sikandar wrote to the Nobles of fran : oat ee SH,

a ae

. How Sikandar sat upon the Throne of [ran . 85

2. How Sikandar wrote to Dilarai and Rishanak,
the Wife and Daughter of Dara, touching the
Nuptials of Rushanak. : . . Ae PIGS
SIKANDAR

GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

SECT.

3.
4.

5.

10.

II.

I2.

ey
14.

16.

177.
18.

159
(continwed)— Vor VI
PAGE
How Dilarai answered the Letter of Sikandar 87
How Sikandar sent his Mother, Nahid, to fetch
Rushanak, and how he married her 89
How Kaid of Hind had a Dream, and how Mihran
interpreted it gI
. How Sikandar marched against Kaid of Hind and
wrote a Letter to him . 98
. How Kaid of Hind answered Sikandar‘ s Letter
and announced the Sending of the Four
Wonders 99
. How Sikandar sent back the Messenger tor receive
the Four Wonders 100
. How Sikandar sent Ten Sages athe a Letter £0
inspect the Four Wonders of Kaid of Hind 101
How the Ten Sages brought the Daughter, the Cup,
the Leech, and the Sage, from Kaid of Hind
to Sikandar : 103
How Sikandar tested the Sage, the Leech, and the
Cup sent by Kaid of Hind . 104
How Sikandar led a Host against Fur of Hind
and wrote a Letter to him z : > Lie
How Fur answered the Letter of Sikandar III
How Sikandar arrayed his Host to fight with Fur
of Hind and made iron Steeds and Riders filled
with Naphtha . rane
. How the Host of Sikandar fought with the Host
of Fur, how Fur was slain “by Sikandar, and
how Sikandar seated Sawurg upon the Throne
of Fur 116
How Sikandar went ¢ ona Pilgrimage to the House
of the Kaaba ; 11g
How Sikandar led his Troops from Judda toward
Misr . so
Sikandar’s Letter to) Kaidafa, Queen of Andalis,
and her Answer . : 123
. How Sikandar led his Troops to “Andalis and took
the Hold of King Faryan . : 124
. How Sikandar went as an Ambassador to Kaidafa
and was recognised by her 127
21. How Kaidafa counselled Sikandar 132
. How Tainish, the Son of Kaidafa, was wroth with
Sikandar, and how Sikandar took Precaution
against him 134
. How Sikandar made a Gomnpact with KaidAfa oon
returned to his Troops. 138

. How Sikandar went to the Country of ie Brah-

mans, inquired into their Mysteries, and
received an Answer , : :

143
160

SIKANDAR

Seas

26.

28.

GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

(continued) — VoE: "Vi
PAGE

. How Sikandar came to the Western Sea and saw
Wonders . 147

How Sikandar reached the Land of Habash,
fought, and was victorious 149

27. How Sikandar reached the Land of the Narmpii,

how he fought and was victorious, how he

slew a Dragon, ascended a Mountain, and was
forewarned. of his own Death : 150

How Sikandar reached the City of Women, named
Harum, and saw Wonders there 153

. How Sikandar went into the Gloom to seek the

Water of Life and a with Birds and
Israfil , 2 £59)

. How Sikandar went ne the Easee saw W Jonders, and
built a Barrier against Yajaj and Majuj . 163

. How Sikandar saw a Corpse in a Palace of Jewels

on the Top of a Mountain, and the Speaking
Tree, and how he was warned of his Death 166

. How Sikandar marched his Army to Chin, carried

his own Letter to Faghfur, and returned to
his Army wich the Answer 169

. How Sikandar returned from Chin, “made War
against the Sindians, and went to Yaman 174

. How Sikandar marched toward Babil and found
the Treasure of Kai Khusrau in a City 176

- How Sikandar went to the City of Babil, wrote a a
Letter to Arastalis, and received his Answer 178
Sikandar’s Letter to his Mother . : 181

. How Sikandar’s Life ended and how they carried
his Coffin to Iskandariya . 183
. How the Sages and other Folk lamented Giemdar 185

. How the Mother and Wife of Sikandar lamented
ay 187
. Firdausi’s Complaint of the Sky and Appeal to God 189

THE ASHKANIAN DYNASTY

. The Praise of Mahmud 207
. The Tribal Kings 210

. How Papak saw Sasan in a , Dream and gave him
a Daughter in Marriage 211

- How Ardshir Papakan was born, and of his Case
with Ardawan 213

. How Ardawan’s Slave- girl fell in mee with
Ardshir and how he fled with her to Pars. 217

. How Ardawan heard of the Flight of Ardshir wi ith

the Damsel and pursued them

7. How Ardawan wrote to Bahman, his Son, to take

Ardshir
?

               

GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 161
THE ASHKANIAN Dynasty (conlinued)— Vor, Vi
SECT. PAGE

8. How Tabak helped Ardshir, fought with Bahman,
and conquered him . 225

g. How Ardawan led forth his Host for "Battle with
Ardshir and was slain . : 227

10. How Ardshir fought with the Kurds and was
defeated . 230

11. How Ardshir attacked the Kurds by Night and
overthrew them . 232
12. The Story of Haftwad and the Case of ‘the Worm . 232
13. How Ardshir fought with Haftwad and was worsted 236

14. How Mihrak of Jahram sacked the Palace of
Ardshir 237

15. How ‘Ardshir heard qbout the ‘Worm And: made
Shift to slay it . : : - 239
16. How Ardshir slew Haftw ad : : 5 > 244

THE. SASANIAN DYNASTY
SECT,

. How Ardshir Papakan sat upon the Throne in
Baghdad . 258
2. The Case of Ardshir and the Daughter of ArdawAn 259

3. How Shapur was born to Ardshir by the Daughter

of Ardawan, and how after seven Years Ard-
shir heard of his Son and acknowledged him. 261

4. How Ardshir, to find out the Future of his Reign,
sent to Kaid of Hind, and Kaid’s Reply . 266

5. The Adventure of Shaptr with the Daughter of
Mihrak, and his taking her to Wife ; 268

6. How Urmuzd was born to Shapur by the Daughter
of Mihrak . 271

7. Of the Wisdom of ‘Ardshir and ne Method of
administering the Realm ; : a/s
8. How Kharrad praised Ardshir . : . ezo4
9. On the Faithlessness of Fortune. 285
10. How Ardshir charged Shaputr ana died. 286

11. Thanksgiving to the Maker and Praise of Mahmud,
the great King : : . - 291

SuHAPUR, SON oF ArDSH{R—

- How Shaptr sat upon the Throne and delivered
a Charge to the Chieftains 295

. How Shaputr fought with the Rimans, how Baz-

antsh, their General, was taken Priscner, and
how Cesar made Peace with Shapur 296

3. How Shapur seated Urmuzd upon the: Throne and
died . 299

VOL, IX
162 GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

UrMuzp, SON oF SHAPUR— Vor. VI
SECT. PAGE
1. How Urmuzd addressed the Assembly. : 302

2. How Urmuzd gave up the Throne to Bahram,
charged him, and died . : ; 5 2 303

BaHRAM, SON OF URMUZD—
1. How Bahram succeeded to the Throne, charged
the Nobles, and died . : , : a) St8)7/

BauRAM, SON OF BAHRAM—
1. How Bahram, Son of Bahram, ascended the
Throne, charged the Nobles, and died . es Re

BAHRAM BAHRAMIYAN—
1. How Bahram Bahramiyan succeded to the Throne
and died four Months after . , : ES SS

Narst, SON oF BAHRAM—
1. How Narsi succeeded to the Throne, counselled his
Son, and died . : : : ‘ © 35

URMuzD, SON oF Narsi—
1. How Urmuzd, Son of Narsi, ascended the Throne,
and how his Life ended : ; 4 StS

SHAPUR, SON OF URMUZD, SURNAMED ZU’L AKTAF—

1. How Shapur, Son of Urmuzd, was born forty days
after his Father’s Death, and how he was
crowned . 328

2. How Tair, the Arab, carried off the Daughter of
Narsi and married her, how Shapur went to
Yaman to fight him, and how his Daughter
fell in Love with Shaputr 2 330

3. How Tair was bemused by his Daughter and how
she came to Shapur, who took the Hold and
slew Tair . 333

4. How Shapur went disguised asa Mer chant to Ram,
how he was taken by Cesar, and how Cesar

ravaged the Land of fran. ‘ 335
5. How the Damsel took Measures to free Shapur, and
how he fled with her from Rum. 339

6. How the High Priest and the Captain of the Host,
hearing of Shapur’s Arrival, went to him

with the Troops . : 345
7. How Shapur made a Night- -attack, and how Cesar

was taken . : 346
8. How Shapur went to Rim and fought with Y anus,

Cesar’s Brother . 351

9. How the Rimans placed BazAntsh upon the
Throne of Cesar; his Letter to Shapur and
the Answer. ; : ; ; 5 « 353
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 163
SHAPUR, SON OF URMUZzD, (continued)— Vor. VI
SECT. PAGE
10. How Bazantsh went to ce and: made a Treaty
of Peace 355
. How Mani, the Painter, came to Shapar with Pre-
tence of being a Prophet, and was slein . 358
12. How Shapur made his Brother Ardshir Regent till
his own Son should grow oe and how his Days
ended , c 360
ARDSHiR, BROTHER OF SHAPUR—
1. How Ardshir sat upon the Throne and gave a
Charge to the Officers . 363
SHAPUR, SON OF SHAPUR—
1. How Shapur, Son of Shapur, sat upon the Throne
and gave a Charge to the Officers . : 3605
BAHRAM, SON OF SHAPUR—
1. How Bahram sat upon the Throne and gave a
Charge to the Officers . 368
YAZDAGIRD, SON OF SHAPUR—
1. How Yazdagird sat upon the Throne and gave a
Charge to the Officers . 374
2. How Bahram Gur, Son of Vardaeid was born and
sent to be brought up by Munzir, the Arab 375
3. How Bahram went ‘to the Chase with a Damsel and
how he displayed his Accomplishment 382
4. How Bahram showed his eee, Se in the
Chase before Munzir 384
5. How Bahram came with Nu’man to Yazdagird 386
6. How Yazdagird put Bahram in Bonds, how he
escaped by the good Offices of Tainush, and
how he returned to Munzir . 389
7. How Yazdagird, by the Advice of an 1 Archmage,
went to the Spring of Say and was killed by
a Water-hcrse 391
8. How the franians took Counsel and placed “Khus-
rau upon the Throne 394
9. How Bahram Gir heard of the Death of hiss Father
and invaded fran : 395
10. How the franians heard of Babrém’ s Pillaging
and wrete to Munzir, and how he replied 397
11. How Bahram Gur arrived at Jahram with the Host
of Munzir, and how the franians went out to
him 400

12. How Bahram Gir harangued the franians as 5 to his
Fitness to rule, how they rejected him but
promised him the Kingship if he would take
the Crown from between the Lions ,
1604 GENERAL TABLE OF “CONTENTS

YAZDAGIRD, SON OF SHAPUR (continued)— VoL. VI
SECT. PAGE
13. How Bahram and Khusrau went to the Waste, and
how Bahram slew the Lions and took his Seat
upon the Throne 409
INDEX 413
VOLUME VII
PAGE
PREFATORY NOTE Vv
ABBREVIATIONS. : 2 Xvi
NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION . Xvili
THE SASANIAN DYNASTY (continued)
BaurAM GUR—
SECT.
1. How Bahram ascended the Throne, charged the
Officers, and wrote Letters to all the Chiefs 7
2. How Bahram pardoned the Fault of the [ranians,
farewelled Munzir and Nu’man, and remitted
the franians’ Arrears of Taxes 9
3. How Bahram went to the House of Eahate the
Water-carrier, and became his Guest 12
4. How Bahram went to the House of Baraham, the
Jew, who treated him scurvily . 16
5. How Bahram bestowed the Wealth of Baraham
upon Lambak ; 19
6. How Bahram slew Lions and forbade “Wine-
drinking : Ez
7. The Story “oi the young “Shoemaker and. how
Bahram allowed Wine again. 24
8. How Ruzbih, Bahram’s High Priest, ruined a
Village by a Stratagem and restored it ZO
9. How Bahram married a Country Miller’s Daughters 31
10. How Bahram found the Treasures of Jamshid and
bestowed them upon the Poor 34
11. How Bahram, returning from Hunting, Sone to the
House of a Merchant and departed displeased. 39
12. How Bahram slew a Dragon and went to a Yokel’s
House : 42
13. How Bahram went to the Chase and espoused the
Daughters of the Thane Barzin . 48
14. How Bahram slew Lions, went to the House ore a
Jeweller, and married his Daughter. ~ 55
15. How Bahram went to the Chase and passed the
Night in the House of Farshidward E 67
16. How a Bramble-grubber revealed the Case of
Farshidward, and how Bahram _ bestowed
that Householder’s Wealth upon the Poor 70
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS
BaurAM Gur (continued)— VOL.
SECT.
17. How Bahram went to the Chase and slew Lions

18.

19.

39.
40.

How Bahram went to hunt the Onager, showed
his Skill before the Princes, and returned to
Baghdad and Istakhr .

How the Khan of Chin led forth a Host fe war
with Bahram, and how the franians asked
Quarter of the Khan and submitted to him

. How Bahram attacked the Host of the Khan and

took him

-. How Bahram took a Pledee from fhe ara nian

how he set up a Pillar to delimit the Realm,
and placed Shahra upon the Throne of Turan.

. How Bahram wrote to announce his Victory to his

Brother Narsi and returned to [ram

23. How Bahram wrote a Letter of Directions to his

Officials

. How Bahram called before him the Envoy of Caesar,

and how the Envoy questioned and answered
the Archmages

-. How Bahram _ dismissed Casas Envoy and

charged his own Officials

. How Bahram went with his own Letter to Shangul

King of Hind

. How Shangul received the Letter from Bahr am

and made Reply

. How Shangul prepared a Feast. for Bahram, and

how Bahram displayed his Prowess

. How Shangul suspected Bahram and kept him from

fran .

. How Bahram fought with the Wolf at ‘the bidding

of Shangul and slew it .

. How Bahram slew a Dragon ;
2. How Shangul became troubled about Bahram and

gave a Daughter to him

. How Faghfur of Chin wrote to Bahram and how

he replied

. How Bahram fled from Hancacean to fen Sana ie

Daughter of Shangul

. How Shangul followed Bahram, learned who he

was, and was reconciled to him

. How Shangul went back to Hind and Bahram to

fran .

. How Shangul with seven Kings visited Bahram
8. How Shangul returned to Hindustan, and how

Bahram remitted the pecs to the
Land-owners
How Bahram summoned Gipsies from. Hindustan.
How the Time of Bahram came to an End

165
VII

PAGE

74

So

CO
>

89

go

96

101
106
109
114
116

118

144
148
150
166 GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

YAZDAGIRD, SON OF BAHRAM GUR— VOL
SECT.

1. How Yazdagird sat upon the Throne and exherted
the Captains of the Host

HurRMuUz—
1. How Hurmuz, Son of Yazdagird, ascended the
Throne

1. How Piriiz sat upon the Throne and made an
Oration

2. How Piruz built He Gites af Pirtiz- Ran aad
Badan-Piriz, and how he went to war with
Turan 5

. The Letter of Kehna ee to Bite

4. How Piruz fought with Khushnawaz and was
slain .

OW

BaLkso—

1. How Balash ascended the Throne and harangued
the [ranians ;

2. How Sufarai had Tidings of the Slaying of Pirdz,
how he wrote a Letter to Khushnawaz, and
how Khushnawaz replied :

3. How Stfarai fought with Khushnawaz, ed noe
Kkubad was released from his Bondage

KusdpD, Son oF Pirtz—

1. How Kubad sat upon the Throne and made an
Oration to the [ranians : : :

2. How Siifarai went to Shiraz, how the franians
slandered him to Kubad, and how Kubad slew
him

3. How the franians put Kubad in | Bonds and com-
mitted him to Rizmihr, the Son of Stfarai,
and how Jamasp, the Brother of Kubad, was
set upon the Throne

4. How Kubad escaped from Ward with Rizmihr,
how he wedded the Daughter of a Thane, and
how he took Refuge with the Haitalians

5. How Kubad returned from Haital to fran, how
he had Tidings of the Birth of his Son, Nushir-
wan, and reascended the Throne .

6. The Story of Kubad and Mazdak, and how Kubad
adopted the Faith of Mazdak

7. How Nushirwan rejected the Faith of Mazdak and
slew him and his Followers

8. How Kubad nominated Kisra as Successor;
and how the Great gave him the name of
Nushfrwan :

aeVEE

PAGE

161

163

165

167

171

173

176

188

190

197

199

201
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

NusufrwAn— VoL

Part I. NUsHirRwAn’s ADMINISTRATION OF THE
REALM, HIS WARS WITH FRONTIER-TRIBES
AND WITH RUM, AND THE REVOLT OF

NusHzAp—

1. The Prelude

2. How Nushirwan ascended: the Throne and made
an Oration to the [ranians . é

3. How Niushirwan divided his Realm into four
Parts and wrote a Decree to his Officers on
the Administration of Justice :

4. How Nushirwan required Babak to muster the
Host. ;

5. How Nushirwan harangued the franiaus, and how
the Kings acknowledged his Supremacy.

6. How Niushirwan went round his Empire and built
a Wall in the Pass between [ran and Turan

7. How Nushirwan chastised the Alaus and the Men
of Balich and Gilan

8. How Munzir, the Arab, came to NiishirwAn for
Succour against the Injustice of Caesar :

g. The Letter of Shah Nushirwan to Cesar of Rim .

10. How the Letter of Nushirwan reached Cesar and
how he replied

11. How Nushirwan went to war aath Caesar 2

12. How Nushirwan took divers Strongholds in his
March to Rum :

13. The Battle of NiishirwAn with Farttriyis, the
Leader of Cesar’s Host, the Victory of Nushir-
wan, and his Capture of clas and Anta-
kiya .

14. How Nushirw4n built the City of Zib-1- -Khusrau in
the Likeness of Antakiya and settled the
Ruman Captives therein

15. How Cesar wrote to Nushirwan and sent Tribute.

16. The Birth of Nushzad, the Son of Nushirwan, by a
Woman who was a Christian :

17. The Sickness of Nushirwan and the Sedition of
Nushzad_ .

18. The Letter of Nushirwé an to RAm Barca, the
Warden of the March of Mada’in, respecting
the Taking of Nushzad : ; 7 :

19. How Ram Barzin fought with par areas and how
Nushzad was slain

Part [I. THE Story oF BUZURJMIHR AND THE
SEVEN BANQUETS OF NUSHiRWAN—
1. How Nushirwan had a Dream and how Buzurjmihr
interpreted it

167

. Vil

PAGE
220

PPA

281
168 GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

NusyuirwAn—
Part II. THE Story oF BUZzURJMINR, etc. (continued)—VoL
SECT.
; 2. The first Banquet of Nushirwan to the Sages, and
the Counsels of Buizurjmihr .
3. The second Banquet of Nushirwan to "Bazurjmihr
and the Archimages
4. The third Banquet of NashirwAn to. Bazurjmihr
and the Archimages 2
5. The fourth Banquet of Nushirwan to. Bazurjmihr
and the Archimages
6. The fifth Banquet of NushirwAn to “Buzurjmihr
and the Archimages_ .
7. The sixth Banquet of Nushirw4n to “Buzurjmihr
and the Archimages
8. The seventh Banquet of NushirwAn to Bazurjmihr
and the Archimages

Part III. THE Story oF MAHBUD AND OTHER
MATTERS—
SECT.

1. The Story of Mahbud, the Wazir of Nushirwan,
and how Mahbtd and his Sons were slain by
the Sorcery of Zuran and a Jew

2. How the Sorcery of Zuran and the Jew in the
Matter of Mahbtid was discovered, and how
both were slain by Command of Nushirwan

3. In Przise of the Wisdom of Nushirwan, and how
he built the City of Sursan .

4. The Story of the War of the Khan with Ghatkar,
the Prince of the Haitalians, the Defeat of
Ghatkar, and how they set Faghanish upon
the Throne 5

. How Nushirwan had Tidings of the Battle of the
Khan with the Haitdlians and how he led a
Host against the Khan :

6. How the Khan had Tidings of the Coming ‘of the
Host of Nushirwan to Gurgan and wrote a
Letter in the Cause of Peace . ;

7. How Nushirwan answered the Letter of ‘he Khan

8. How the Khan bethought himself and wrote offer-
ing his Daughter in Marriage to Nushirwan_ .

9. How Nushirwan answered the Letter, and sent
Mihran Sitad to see and fetch the Daughter
of the Khan :

10. How the Khan sent his ‘Daughter, ‘escorted by
Mihran, with a Letter and Treasures to
Nushirwan ; ; ; ; :

It. How the Khan withdrew, and how Nushirwan
marched from Gurgan to Taisafin

12. Discourse on the Justice of Nushirwan and how
Mortals had Peace under his Usages

on

. VII

PAGE
287
290
296
301
304

597

318

323

326

328

333

337

342

345

349

354
358

364
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

NusuirwAn—
Part III. Tue Story oF MAnBUwp, elc. (continued)— VOL.
SECT.
13. How Buzurjmihr counselled Nushirwan and dis-

coursed on good Deeds and Words.

Part IV. THE INTRODUCTION OF THE GAME OF CHESS
into [RAN. THE LEGEND OF THE INVEN-
TION OF THE GAME. THE DISCOVERY OF
THE Book OF KALILA AND DIMNA
1. How the Raja of Hind sent the Game of Chess to
Niushirwan :
2. How Bazurjmihr invented ‘Nard, and how Nushir-
wan sent it with a Letter to the Raja of Hind.
3. The Story of Gav and Talhand, and the Invention
of Chess ‘ : : ‘
4. How Nushirwan aeat Barewt the Leech, to Hin-
dustan to fetch a wondrous Drug, and how
Barzwi Pee back the Book of Kalila and
Dimna :
INDEX

VOW VLE

ABBREVIATIONS é
NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION

THE SASANIAN DYNASTY (continued)

NusHfRWAN (continued)—

Part V. THE FALL AND RESTORATION TO FAVOUR OF
BuUzuRJMIHR, AND THE WISDOM OF NUSH-
iRwAN—

SECT.
. How Niushirwan was wroth with Buzurjmihr and

ordered him to be put in Ward

2. How the Ambassador of Caesar came to Nushirwé an
with a locked Casket and how Buzurjmihr
was set at large to declare its Contents

3. Discourse on the Responses of Nushirwan

4. Nushirwan’s Letter of Counsel to his Son Hurmuzd

5. How an Archmage questioned Nushirwan and how
he made Answer .

PART ee THE SHAH’S LAST YFARS—
. How Nishirwan made ready to war ae
Ceesar :
2. How Nushirwan took the Stronghold of "Sakila
and how a Shoemaker had Dealings with him.
3. How the Envoys of Caesar came to Nushirwan
with Apologies and Presents. :
4. How Naushirwan chose Hurmuzd as his Successor.

169
VII
PAGE

3660

384
389

394

14
25

28

43
46

51
54
170

GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

Nusu fRwAN—

PART VI.
SECT.

5a
6.

HURMUZD,

I.
2.

3.

Io.

Il.

13.

14.

B52

16.

07

How Hurmuzd’s Detter granting Quarter io Pat
muda, reached Bahram Chiubina, and how
Bahram Chubina was wroth with Parmida

Tuer Siudn’s Last Years (continued)— Vor. VIII
PAGE

How the Archimages questioned Hurmuzd and
how he replied 57

How Nushirwan appointed Hurmuzd as his Suc-
cessor and gave him parting Counsels , 61

. How NushirwAn had a Dream and how Buzurjmihr

interpreted it as signifying the Appearance of
Muhammad 66

Son oF NusHirwAn—

The Prelude a)

How Hurmuzd ascended the Throne and harangued
the Chiefs : 78

How UHurmuzd slew {zid Gashasp, Zarduhsht,

Simah Barzin, and Bahram Azarmihan, his
Father’s Ministers 81
. How Hurmuzd turned from Tyranny to Justice go

. How Hosts gathered from all Sides against Hur-

muzd, and how he took Counsel with his
Wazirs 92

How Hurmuzd heard of “Bahram Chubina and
sent for him 96

. How Bahram Chubina came to Hurmuzd and was
made Captain of the Host : 100

. How Bahram Chubina went with twelve thousand
Cavaliers to fight King Sawa 106

. How King Sawa sent a Message to Bahram
Chibina and his Answer 113

How King Sawa and Bahram Chubina set the
Battle i in Array against each other. 115

How King Sawa sent another ee to Bahram
Chibina and his Answer ry

. How Bahram Chubina had a Dream in the Night,

how he gave Battle the next eee and
how King Sawa was slain 121

How Bahram Chubina sent a Letter announcing his

Victory, and the Head of King Sawa, to Hur-
muzd, and his Answer . 129

How Bahram Chubina fought with Parmida, Son

of King Sawa, and overcame him, and how
Parmuda took Refuge in the Hold of Awaza . 134

How Bahram Chiubina sent a Message to Parmida
and how Parmuda asked Quarter . 138

How Bahram Chubina asked of Hurmuzd a War-

rant to spare ihe Life of Parmuda and the
Answer 141

143
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS 171
Hurmuzp, Son oF NUsHiRwAn (continued)— Vor VIII
SECT. PAGE
18. How Parmiida came before Hurmuzd with the
Treasures sent by Bahram Chubina 149
19. How Hurmuzd heard of the Ill-doing of Bahram
Chubina and made a Compact with the Khan 151
20. How Hurmuzd wrote a chiding Letter to Bahram
Chubina and sent him a Distaff-case, Cotton,
and Women’s Raiment 153
21. How Bahram Chubina put on the Woman’ Ss Dress
and showed himself therein to the Chiefs of the
Host eS
22. How Bahram Chubina went to hunt and saw a
Lady who foretold the Future to him 150
5 23. How Bahram Chiubina assumed the royal Style
and how Kharrdd, Son of Barzin, and the
Archscribe fled 158
24. How Hurmuzd received News ‘of Bahram Cht-
bina’s Doings, and how Bahram Chubina sent a
Frail of Swords to Hurmuzd. 160
25. How Bahram Chubina made known to the ‘Chiefs
his Designs upon the Throne, and how his
Sister Gurdya advised him : 163
26. Bahram Chubina’s Letter to the Khan and how he
coined Money with the name of Khusrau
Parwiz and sent it to Hurmuzd : TZ
27. How Bahram Chubina wrote to Hurmuzd and how
Khusrau Parwiz fled from his Father als
28. How Hurmuzd sent Ayin Gashasp with an Army
to fight Bahram Chibina and how he was slain
by his Comrade ; 177
29. How Hurmuzd grieved, refused Audience to the
franians, and was blinded by Bandwi and
Gustaham . : 182
30. How Khusrau Parwiz heard of the ‘Blinding of
Hurmuzd 184
KuusRAU Parwiz—
1. The Prelude . : nee | 196
2. How Khusrau Parwiz sat upon the Throne and
made an Oration. 197
3. How Khusrau Parwiz visited ne. Father and asked
Forgiveness 198
4. How Bahram Chubina heard of the ‘Blinding of
Shah Hurmuzd and how he led his Troops
against Khusrau Parwiz 200
5. How Khusrau Parwiz and Bahram Chibina met
and parleyed : : . 204
6. How Bahram Chubina and Khusrau Parwiz
returned, how Gurdya advised Bahram Chu-
bina, and how Khusrau Parwiz told his Pur-
pose to the [rdnians 220
72

9.

Io.

3.

14.

cr

15.
TOs

U7:

18.

19.

GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

IKKHUSRAU PARWIz (continued)—
SECT

7:

How Bahram Chutbina attacked the Army of
Khusrau Parwiz by Night and how Khusrau
Parwiz fled

. How Khusrau Parwiz ene to ie Cie and fled ia

Rum, and how Hurmuzd was slain

How Bahram Chubina sent Troops after Khusrau
Parwiz and how Bandwi contrived to rescue
him from their Hands.

How Bahram, the Son of Siyawush, took Bandwi
and carried him to Bahram Chubina

. How Bahram Chubina summoned the Magnates ai

fran, how they discussed his Pretensions to
the Kingdom, and how he acceded to the
Throne

. How Bandwi plotted with Bahram, the S Son of Siyé-

wush, to slay Bahram Chubina, and how
Bandwi fled from Bond

How Khusrau Parwiz went toward Ram by the
Desert-route and how a Hermit told him of
the Past and Future

How a Cavalier of Cassar came to Khusrau Parwiz
and how he sent an Answer by Gustaham,
Balwi, Andiyan, Kharrad, Son of Barzin, and
Shapur to Cesar.

How Cesar answered the Letter of Khusrau Parwiz

How Cesar wrote to Khusrau Parwiz, declining to
help him, and his Answer

How Cesar wrote the second Time ‘to Khusrau
Parwiz about giving him Aid

How Khusrau Parwiz answered Cesar about the
Alliance

How Crsar made a "Talisman and deceived the
Envoys of Khusrau Parwiz, and how Kharrad,
Son of Barzin, solved the Mystery .

. How Kharrad, Son of Barzin, expounded the

Faith of the Indians and exhorted Cesar

. How Cesar sent a Host and his Daughter to Khus-

rau Parwiz.

. How Khusrau Parwiz led has Host to oan nada.

gan and how Bandwi met him on the Way

. How Bahram Chubina had Tidings of the Coming

of Khusrau Parwiz and wrote a Letter to the
Chiefs of fran, and how the Letter fell into the
Hands of Khusrau Parwiz and his Answer

. How Khusrau Parwiz fought with Bahram Chi-

bina and how Kut, the Ruiiman, was slain

. How Khusrau Parwiz fought with Pahram Chu-

bina the second Time, was defeated, and
escaped from him by the Help of Surtsh. :

Vo. VIII

PAGE

257
260

261
264

269

271
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

Kuusrav Parwiz (continued)— VoL.
SECT.
26. How Khusrau Parwiz fought the third Time with

33.
34:

35:

30.

37-

38.

39.

40.

4I.

43.
44.
45.

Bahram Chuibina and defeated him

. How Khusrau Parwiz sent an Army under Nastih
after Bahram Chttbina, and how Bahram
Chubina eae him and reached the Khan
of Chin

. How Khusrau Perwiz pillaged the Camp of Bah-

ram Chubina and wrote a Letter to Cesar who
answered it with a Robe of Honour and Gifts

. How Niyattiis was wroth with Bandwi and how

Maryam made Peace between them

. How Khusrau Parwiz gave Presents to NiyAtts

and the Rimans, how he dismissed them to
Rum, and wrote Patents for the Nobles of fran

1. Firdausi’s Lament for the Death of his Son .
2. The Story of Bahram Chubina and the Khan of

Chin . :

How Makatura was slain by Bahram Chubina

How the Lion-ape slew a Daughter of the Khan,
how it was slain by Bahram Chubina, and how
the Khan gave him a Daughter and the King-
dom of Chin

How Khusrau Parwiz heard of the Case of Bahram
Chibina and wrote a Letter to the Khan, and
how he replied

How Khusrau Parwiz sent aed Son of Bain:
to the Khan and how he schemed to slay Bah-
ram Chubina

How Bahram Chitbina was Si by Tealan as
Kharrad, Son of Barzin, had planned :

How the Khan had Tidings of Bahram Chibina’s s
Death and how he destroyed the House and
Family of Kulin

How Khusrau Parwiz had Tidings of the Slaying of
Bahram Chubina and honoured Kharrad, Son
of Barzin

How the Khan sent his Brother to Gurdya, the
Sister of Bahram Chubina, with a Letter
touching her Brother’s Death and asking her
in Marriage as his Queen, and her Answer

How Gurdya consulted her Nobles and fled from
Marv

. How the ichan receiv ved Tidings of the Flight of

Gurdya and how he sent Tuwurg with an Army
after her, and how Gurdya slew Tuwurg.

How Gurdya wrote to Gurdwi

How Khusrau Parwiz slew Bandwi

How Gustaham rebelled against Khusrau Parwiz
and took Gurdya to Wife

eS
Vill

PAGE

300

393

306

309

340
349
351
354
354

355
GENERAL TABLE OF CONEENTS

174
KHusRAU Parwiz (continued)— Vor. VIII
SECT. PAGE
46. How Khusrau Parwiz took Counsel with Gurdwi
concerning Gustaham and how Gurdya,
prompted | by Gurdwi, slew him 358
47. How Gurdya wrote to Khusrau Parwiz and how
he summoned and married her 301
48. How Gurdya showed her Accomplishment ‘before
Khusrau Parwiz . : 363
49. How Khusrau Parwiz sent an ill-disposed March-
lord to Rai and how he oppressed the Folk
there : 305
50. How Gurdya made Sport before Khusrau Pave
and how he gave Rai to her . : 367
51. How Khusrau Parwiz portioned out his Realm 3608
52. How Shirwi, the Son of Khusrau Parwiz, was born
of Maryam with bad Auspices and how Khus-
rau Parwiz informed Cesar . 371
53- How Cesar wrote a Letter to Khusrau Parwiz,
sent Gifts, and asked for the Cross of Christ 374
54. How Khusrau Parwiz answered Cesar’s Letter and
sent Gifts 379
THE STORY OF KHUSRAU PaRWiz AND SHiRIN—
55. Lheserelude . : 2 en 5 Shee
56. How Khusrau Parwiz loved Shirin, how they
parted, how he met her again while hunting
and sent her to his Bower 383
57. How the Nobles heard that Shirin had come ‘to the
Bower of Khusrau Parwiz and how they
advised him and were satisfied with his Answer 386
58. How Shirin murdered Maryam and Khusrau Par-
wiz put Shirwi in Bonds 389
59. How Khusrau Parwiz made the Bheone of Tékdis 391
60. The Story of Sarkash and Barbad, the Minstrel,
and Khusrau Parwiz 396
61. How Khusrau Parwiz built the Pal: vce of Mada’i in 400
62. Discourse on the Splendour and Greatness of
Ixhusrau Parwiz. : 405
63. How Khusrau Parwiz turned fou Justice, haw.
the Chiefs revolted, and how Guraz called
in Cesar 407
64. How Cesar withdrew through an Bx xpe dient of
KKhusrau Parwiz and how the Chiefs released
Shirwi from Bonds ; 409
65. How Khusrau Parwiz was taken aad) how Shhewd
sent him to Taisafun 418

INDEX

’ ’ ° ' ’ ,

423
GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

VOL? Ix

PREFATORY NOTE
ABBREVIATIONS. 3
NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION .

THE SASANIAN DYNASTY (concluded)

KupBApD (COMMONLY CALLED Sufrwf)—
SECT.

1. How Shirwi ascended the Throne, announced his
Will, and sent Chiefs to his Father with Counsel
and Excuses

2. How Khusrau Parwiz answ rered Shire

3. How Shirwi grieved for Khusrau Parwiz and how
the Chiefs were displeased thereat :

4. How Barbad lamented Khusrau Parwiz, cut off
his own Fingers, and burned his Instruments
of Music .

5. How the Chiefs demanded from Shiri the Death
of Khusrau Parwiz and how he was slain by
Mihr Hurmuzd

6. How Shirwi asked Shfrin in Marriage, how Shirin
killed herself, and how Shirwi was slain

ARDSHIR, SON OF SHfRWwi—
1. How Ardshir, Son of Shirwi, ascended the Throne
and harangued the Chiefs :
2. How Guraz was displeased at Ardshir being Shah
and how he caused Ardshir to be slain by Piruz
Son of Khusrau.

GuRAZ ALSO CALLED FarAyin—
I. How Guraz, (also called Farayin,) received News
of the Slaying of Ardshir, hastened to [ran, took
Possession of the Throne, and was killed by
Shahranguraz

PURANDUKHT—
1. How Purandukht ascended the Throne and slew
Pirtiiz, Son of Khusrau, and how her own Life
ended

AZARMDUKHT—
1. How Azarmdukht ascended the Throne and how
she died

FARRUKHZAD— :
1. How Ferrukhzad ascended the Throne and how
he was slain by a Slave ; 5 ,

PAGE

xi
Xil

27

29

32
36

44

45

51

56

59

6y
176

Y AZDAGIRD—
SECT.
ee

2.

on oO On

Io.

GENERAL TABLE OF CONTENTS

How Yazdagird ascended the Throne and ad-
dressed the Chiefs : i . . :

How Sa’ad, Son of Wakkas, invaded fran, how
Yazdagird sent Rustam to oppose him, and
how Rustam wrote a Letter to his Brother

. How Rustam wrote to Sa’ad, Son of Wakkas, and

how he replied

. How Rustam fought with ‘Sa’ ad, Son of Wakkas,

and was slain

. How Yazdagird EGuanlied aah the (Ages aa

went to Va ea

. How Yazdagird wrote to Mahwi of Sur :
. How Yazdagird wrote to the Marchlords of Tus
. How Yazdagird went to Tus and how Mahwi of

Str met him

. How Mahwi of Sur imeited Bihan a war with

Yazdagird and how Yazdagird fled and hid
himself i ina Mill .

How Mahwi of Sur sent the Miller to kill Yazdagird,
and how the Archimages counselled Mahwi to
forbear

Ir. How Yazdagird was slain by Khusrau, the Miller

14.

15.

. How Mahwi “of Sur was informed of the Obsequies

of Yazdagird and ascended the Throne.

. How Bizhan, hearing of the Slaying of Yazdagird

and of Mahwi of Sur’s Accession to the Throne,
led forth the Host to fight with him

How Mahwi of Sur was taken and slain by Order
of Bizhan

Account of the Completion of the SHahnama

VoL. IX

PAGE

7O

72
78
83
85
89
go

95

96

101
107

II2

115

118
121
CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS

VOLUME I.

Page xii, line 21, for ‘ Evil’ read ‘ evil.’
Page xiii, line 15, for ‘ Born’ read ‘ born.’
Page 4, line 4, delete ‘ still.’
Page 5, line 22, after ‘camel’ add ‘ of which the red-haired variety
was most esteemed.’
Page 6, line 21, for ‘ Scythian’ read ‘ Elamitic.’
Page 7, line 19, for‘ was’ read ‘became,’ line 25 and elsewhere, for
‘Trita’ and ‘ Traitana’ read ‘ Trita’ and ‘ Traitana,’
Page 9, line 16 and elsewhere, for ‘ Azarbijan’ read ‘ Azarbaijan.’
Page 10, bottom. The date of the fall of Nineveh has lately been
assigned to the year B.c. 612. See‘ The Fall of Nineveh,’
p.9seq. By C. J. Gadd.
reference number 2, after R insert P.
Page 11, line 290 and elsewhere, for ‘ Hira and Anbar ’ read‘ Hira and
Ambar.’
Page 13, reference number 2, for ‘ NESH’ read ‘ NSEH.’
Page 14, line 25, for ‘Samanides’ read ‘ Samanids.’
Page 17, delete lines 7-10.
reference number 1, add ‘See too A. V. Williams Jackson,’
‘ From Constantinople to the Home of Omar Khayyam,’
Chin.
Page 19, line 19, for ‘ Sacaestan ’ read ‘ Sacaestan.’
reference number 3, delete ‘ iii.’
Page 21, line 7 and elsewhere, for ‘ Nuh’ read ‘ Nuh.’
line 12, for ‘ appealed ’ read ‘ turned.’
Page 29, line 12 from bottom, cf LEC, pp. 206, 207 and note.
Page 31, delete lines 13-16, and read ‘that Fazl, son of Ahmad, is
referred to on both occasions.’
Page 33, line 23, delete full stop, insert comma, and for‘ Such is not’
read ‘ not be in.’
Page 34, five lines from bottom, delete ‘ While I sat looking on’ and
vead “ While I o’erlooked from far.’
Page 37, line 22, for ‘ Aridi read ‘ ’Arudi.’
Page 38, seven lines from bottom, for ‘ Bazh’ read ‘ Bazh.’
six lines from bottom, after ‘ city’ add reference number t.
at bottom add note ‘ 1 The quarter in which Bazh was situated
was known as Tabaran.’
Page 39, bottom, reference number 1, delete‘ §1 and 7’ and read‘ The
too spiritual conception of the Deity in §1 and the refer-
ences to ’Ali in §7.’
VOL. IX 177 M
178 CORRECTIONS AND .ADDITIONS

Page 41, last line, for ‘ axe’ read ‘ ax.’
Page 43, note 2, for ‘ fakka’ read ‘ fakka,’ and for ‘ Cf.’ read ‘ Cf.’
Page 45, line 24, after ‘indigo’ add reference number 2.

line five from bottom, after ‘ Cemetery ’ add reference number 3.

at bottom add ‘2Cf. Encl. Brit. (11th ed.), Vol. 11, p. 917,
Cole.

* Professor A. V. Williams Jackson’s suggestion that, as
burial in the Muhammadan cemetery was refused, the
corpse of Firdausi was reconveyed within the walls and
buried in ground belonging to him, seems far f.om im-
probable. From Constantinople to the Tomb of Omar
Khayyam, p. 291.

Page 50, line 7, for ‘ Ahriman’ vead ‘ Ahriman.’
Page 51, line 23, add reference number t.

bottom, add ‘ 1 Thus Piran (see p. 55) may represent Perun,

the Slavonic god of thunder.’
Page 61, line 3, delete ‘which’ and to end of sentence, and insert‘ 1.e.
of Azargashasp.’
Page 62, bottom, after reference number 7 insert DZA, i, 209.
Page 67, line 18, end, add « bin.’
Page 68, line 9, end add‘ or identical with.’
bottom, reference number 1, add NIN, 15.
Page 69, bottom, for ‘ 108’ read ‘ 107.’
Page 71, line 19, after ‘ Oxus’ insert ‘ Caspian.’
line 20, after ‘ Dardanelles ’ insert ‘ Mediterranean.’
bottom, reference number 6, after ‘ 80’ add ‘ notes.’
Page 73, line 8 from bottom, for ‘land’ read ‘ earth.’
sy 5 after ‘ Shahs’ add reference number t.
aus ~ after ‘canal’ add reference number 2.
bottom, add ‘1Kai Kubad. See Vol. ii, p.22. *Id. 192.’
Page 74, line 8, after ‘tree’ add reference number i.
bottom, add ‘ 1 Cercis Siliquastum.’
Page 77, line 11, for ‘ the first half’ vead ‘ three-fifths.’
line 8 from bottom, after ‘repetitions’ add reference
number 1.
bottom, add ’1These of course do not include the great
duplications of tradition in the poem.’
Page 82, line 11, for ‘ regarded ’ read ‘ looked upon.’
line 25, after ‘ farr’ add reference number 2.
bottom, add ‘ * pp. 369, 370.’
Page 83, line 18, before ‘ mubidan’ insert—
line 25, after ‘ subject ’ add reference number 2.
bottom, add ‘ + The expression is used, however, of Bahram
Gur (Vol. vii, p. 78) and of Nushirwan (viii, p. 14).
It is also applied to non-franians, to Suhrab, who was
opposing the [franians (ii 145), Piran (ii, 261, 275, 324,
iii, 106), Pilsam (ii, 352), Tazhav, an Iranian deserter
(iii, 28), Bazanush (vi, 297), and there are other
instances.’
Page 84, line 3, for ‘camp enclosure’ read ‘ camp-enclosure.’
CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 179

Page 85, line 20, for ‘end’ read ‘ beginning.’

Page 87, bottom, add‘ Rogers, The Shah-namah of Fardusi. Trans-
lated from the original Persian. 1909. (A version
partly in verse and partly in epitomized prose.)

Page 88, lines 11 and 27, for “ Ardibihisht ’ read ‘ Ardibihisht.’

line 12 and bottom, for ‘ Sharivar’ read ‘ Shahrivar.’
lines 12 and 26, for ‘ Farvardin’ read ‘ Farwardin.’
line 17 and page 89, line 3, for ‘ Adar’ read ‘ Azar.’
Page 8g, line 4, for ‘ Din’ read ‘ Dai.’
Page 90, line 9, for ‘3 generations’ read ‘ 4 generations!’ and add at
bottom,’ 1 See Vol. v. p. 203.’
for‘ Barmaitin. Kataitn.’ read‘ Purmaya. Kaidnush.’
15 add as son to Minuchthr « Zarasp.’
17, add as son to Tus ‘ Zarasp.’
Page 92, line 5 add as descendant from Tur ‘ Mah Afrid, d.’
line 10, add as descendant of Wisa ‘ Kurtkhan.’
line 11, for ‘ Piran’ read ‘ Piran=Gulshahr.’
line 15, to descendants of Afrdsiydb add ‘ Manizha, d.=
Bizhan’
and delete ‘ Ruin.’
line 17, for ‘ Kurakhan’ read ‘ Kurakhan.’
Page 93, lines 20 and 22, transpose ‘EP’ and‘ EHI.’
Page 94, delete lines 4-5.
bottom, add ‘ZT. Chronique de Abou-Djafar-Mo’ham-
med-Ben-Djarir-Ben-Yezid Tabari. Traduite sur la
version Persane d’Abou-’Ali Mo’hammed Bel’ami par
M. Hermann Zotenberg.’

Page 100, line 4,. for ‘Shaddad son of Ad’ vead ‘ Shaddad son of ’Ad.’

Page 100, line 7, for ‘Shaddad’ read ‘ Shaddad.’

Page 100, line 10, for ‘ Nasiru’d’ read ‘ Nasiru’d.’

Page 104, after line 4 inmsert—

“ Thus is it now : what the world’s end will be
None knoweth openly or privily.’

Page 106, line 12, for ‘ The’ read ‘ In,’

Page 108, line 15, for ‘ with’ read ‘ to.’

Page 112, line 2, for ‘The’ read <«In.’

8 from bottom, for ‘light’ read ‘ blaze.’
Page 113, line 7 and elsewhere, for ‘Ind’ read ‘ Hind.’
line 19, end, add full stop.
Page 117, line 2, Delete ‘ FOR.’
Page 118, line 4, for ‘mountain of the holy’ read ‘ Mountain of the
Holy.’

Page 120, line 1, for ‘ Slain’ read ‘ slain’ and delete ‘ the Hand of.’

Page 121, line 5, for ‘ Fight’ read ‘ fight.’

Page 126, line 5, add ‘ This is the first of many doublets in the poem.’

line 16, for ‘ gold’ read ‘ good.’

Page 129, line 6 from bottom, for ‘o’ read ‘ of.’
180

Page

Page
Page
Page

Page
Page
Page

Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page
Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page

Page

Page <

Page

Page

130,

EST,
E32)
135,

138,
141,
142,

143,

CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS

line 11, after gallery > ¢nserts.s.0

line 23, for ‘have’ read ‘find,’ and add to reference 4

‘WPT. i. 142.’
line 15, for ‘ They’ read ‘ they.’
line 11, add full stop at end.
line 3, for ‘departed from’ read ‘ abandoned.’

line 11 from bottom, end, delete comma and insert ful! stop.

line 8 from bottom, delele ‘ thou my’ and read ‘ any.’
line 4 from bottom, for ‘ light’ read ‘ Grace.’
line 5 from bottom, for ‘ downstricken’ read ‘ down-
stricken.’
line 4 from bottom, for ‘ Aspikan’ read ‘ Aspikan.’
Ibias: Fp, Gir Geen
T5 OMe 2 YEA a3
20, for ‘ Baghdad’ read ‘ Baghdad.’
25, after ‘ Ispahan ’ add reference number 4.
31, for reference number 3 read 5.
33, for veference number 4 read 6.

bottom, after reference 3 insert “*ZT, i, 117,’ and for

145,
147,

veference numbers 4 and 5 vead 5 and 6.
line 25, for ‘ Evil’ read ‘ evil.’
line 7, for ‘ Kurds’ read ‘ Kurds.’

161, line 6, for ‘ Bait al’ read ‘ Baitu’l.’

170
173,
174,

175,
Tete

184,
189,
199,
201,
205,
207,
208,

209,

2TT,

line 2, for ‘HIS REIGN WAS’ read ‘ HE REIGNED.’

line 31, for ‘ glory’ read ‘ Glory.’

after line 21 add ‘§24. We have here another doublet.

Cf. p. 290.’
line 13, for “He, vead ‘ Be.’
line 13, delete ‘never’ and insert it after ‘ children.’
2 from bottom, end, insert comma.

line 18, for ‘except’ read ‘ unless.’

line 4 from bottom, for ‘ Envious’ read ‘ envious.’

line 7 from bottom, for ‘ Slain’ read ‘ slain.’

note, line 4, for ‘Namah’ read ‘ Namah.’

line 9, for ‘ Born’ read ‘ born.’

line 13, for ‘Chach’ read ‘ Chach.’

line 12, for ‘wagons did they fill’ vead ‘wains they
filled.’ ;

line 19, for ‘no lorger harboureth’ read ‘ hath ceased
to harbour.’

line 20, for ‘ evident ’ read ‘ plain.’

delete line 2 and read ‘ With treasure and _ brocade,
dinars and gems.’

line 21, for “ All” vead “ all’

line 7 from bottom, for ‘ torquoise’ read ‘ turquoise.’

line 5 from bottom, for ‘a’ vead ‘the’ and after ‘ bal)’
add vefevence number 1.

bottom, tmsert ‘ 1 See p. 79.’

221, line 18, for « Announce’ vead ‘announce.’

line 7, from bottom, for ‘he’ read ‘ He.’
Page
Page

Page
Page

Page
Page

Page :

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

From

Page
Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page

Page
Page
Page

No

NNN
Ww OW Wh
o

237;
250,
252,
256,
275)
280,

284,
293,
299,
397,
325)
337;
338,

342

347;
351,

352,
354,
355,
358,
306,
373,
378,
380,

381,

CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 181

line 11, after ‘me’ insert ‘ stay.’
line 12, for ‘ Stop to draw breath’ read ‘ To breathe.’
22, for ‘ moralising’ read ‘ moralling.”’

, line 4, delete ‘ of our.’

line 21, for ‘ Slain’ road ‘ slain’ and delete ‘ the Hand
of. ;

line 9, for ‘ produce of it’ read ‘ fruit thereof.’

line 9, for ‘ our avenging’ read ‘ vengeful.’

after line 7 insert ‘ §18. Cf. previous reign, §24.’

line 8, beginning, insert ‘ §29.’

5 from bottom, beginning, insert ‘ §31.’

bottom, note 1, add‘ But cf. Vol. v. p. 30.’

side reference, prefix ‘ V.’

line 15, for ‘ Danbar’ read ‘ Dambar.’

line 4, for ‘ Dunbar’ read ‘ Dambar.’

line 3 from bottom, for ‘ Explain’ read ‘ explain.’

line 9, and elsewhere, for ‘ Almighty’ read ‘ almighty ’
when not absolute.

line 1, for ‘ Aware’ read ‘ aware.’

line 20, for ‘ War against’ read ‘ fight.’

end of note, add ‘ 309.’

line 6 from bottom, for ‘ Wroth’ read ‘ wroth.’

line 7 from bottom, add reference number i after ‘ lasso.’

line 11, for ‘Sam’ read ‘ Zal.’

line 2, delete ‘FOR.’

line 6, for ‘ Yast’ read ‘ Yasht,’ and at bottom, note 1,
after 1 insert ‘ Cf. p. 59.’

, line 3 from bottom, for ‘ Knowhow’ read ‘ Know
how.’

line to, for ‘ lowered’ read ‘ loured.’

side reference, insert 2.

4 lines from bottom, tnsert comma after ‘ throb.’

line 4, delete semicolon.

line 21, for ‘Guzhdaham ’ read ‘ Gazhdaham.’

line 4 from bottom, delete comma at end.

line 6 and elsewhere, for ‘ Hirmund’ read ‘ Hirmund.’

line 12, delete ‘ not.’

line 2, for ‘HIS REIGN WAS’ read ‘HE REIGNED.’

line 7, for ‘lance’ read ‘ spear.’

line 6 from bottom, after ‘ harm’ add reference number 1,
and at bottom add ‘Cf. BLHP, i, 452. Jackson,
“From Constantinople to the Tomb of Omar
Khayyam,” p. I19.’

line 4 from bottom, for ‘ plants’ read ‘ plans.’

VOLUME II.

v, line 13, end, add—
ix, line 25, delete ‘ Kai.’
3, line, 12, for‘ Kataitn’ read‘ Katayin.’
182

Page

Page
Page
Page
Page

Page
Page
Page
Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page
Page

CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS

3, line 15, to children of Gushtasp add Farshidward, Shirt,
and thirty-seven others (un-named), for ‘ Bishi-
tan’ read ‘ Bishitan and for ‘ Afrid’ vead ‘ Afrid.
bottom, after (20) insert =d. of Kaid.

5, line 20, after ‘ d’Or,’ add full stop, and for ‘ texte’ vead

‘ Texte.’
6, heading, for ‘NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION’ read
“ ABBREVIATIONS.’

18, line 4, for ‘ Kharzarwan’ vead ‘ Khazarwan.’

19, line 18, for ‘ Turkestan’ vead ‘ Turkistan.’

27, line 1, delete full stop at end.

line 4 from bottom. ‘ There is actually a tribe existing to
this day among the Elburz Mountains, or the
fastnesses of ancient Hyrcania, which still bears
the name Div Sapeed.’ S. G. W. Benjamin,
Persia and the Persians, p. 302.

20 NOLEN Ladd av Olenvenp aelen One

61, line 9, foy “ bears’ vead ‘ bear.’

69 line 20 add semicolon at end.

81, line 3 from bottom, after ‘ crystal’ insert reference number 9
and at bottom add ‘ Ruins near Aivan-i-Kaif (Kai ?)
some forty miles South-east of Tihran are still
traditionally ascribed to Kai Kats. See A. V.
Williams Jackson. From Constantinople to the
Home of Omar Khayyam, p. 123.’

89, line 25, end, insert comma.

26 after ‘ Kaus’ insert comma.

99, line 6 from bottom, after ‘ Zawara ’ add reference number 1
and at bottom add ‘1This is the first mention of
Rustam’s brother.’

97, line 5, for ‘a Zam of’ read «Zam’s stream with.’

bottom, delete ‘The name of a river’ and read ‘i.e. the
Oxus.’

103, line 12, for ‘ What ever’ read ‘ Whatever.’

118, bottom, for “1, p. 236° read ‘v, p. 30.7

119, bottom, after ‘ V’ insert full stop.

121, line 21, after ‘him’ insert reference number 1, and at

bottom add ‘.1C. adds rightly :
They led him herdwards
That they might have their portion from that steed ;
As I have heard, he covered forty mares
And one became with foal.
Cf. p. 128 and NIN, p. 45 note 1.’

157, line 7, for ‘spoken’ read ‘ unspoken.’

196, line 16, for ‘ heart and eyes’ read ‘ Heart and Eyes.’

200, line=11, for, she vead «Shes

221, line 13, for ‘unled’ vead ‘ unsoiled.’

224, end of last line, tnsert reference number 1 and add at
bottom ‘ » See pp. 38 seq., 88 seq.’

225, line 12, for ‘ All-righteous’ vead ‘ all-righteous.’

229, line 16, for ‘Who’ read ‘who. and elsewhere.

 
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page

Page
Page

Page
Page

Page
Page

Page

Page
Page

Page

Page

Page
Page

CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 183

247, line 5 and elsewhere, for ‘ Almighty’ read ‘ almighty ’
when not absolute.
252, line 4, for ‘my’ read ‘ mine.’
256, line 6 from bottom, for ‘ caparisoned ’ read ‘ betrapped.’
257, line 2 from bottom, delete full stop and insert comma at
end.
261, line 21 and elsewhere, for ‘ Holy’ read ‘ holy’ when not
absolute.
265, line 18, delete comma at end.
281, line 22, for ‘Iran’ vead ‘ Turan.’
285, line 1, for ‘dressed’ read ‘ drest.’
306, line 14, end, tmsert semicolon.
310, line 4 from bottom, for ‘ All-holy’ read ‘ all-holy.’
312, line 4 from bottom, after ‘ league ’ insert comma.
313, line 5 from bottom, end, insert comma.
4 from bottom after ‘ hearing ’ insert comma.
321, line 1, end, add reference number 1.
12, end, add reference number 2.
bottom, imsert ‘ 1See p. 261. +See p. 293.’
328, line 11, for ‘ Kalur’ read ‘ Kalu.’
5 from bottom, for ‘ blunt’ read ‘ pointless.’
4 from bottom, for ‘ would go’ read ‘ hunted,’ and
insert full stop at end.
3 from bottom, delete‘ To hunt,’ and for ‘at’ read
AGS
341, line 8 from bottom, for ‘ Kawa’ read ‘ Kawa.’
374, line 6 from bottom, end, insert reference number 1.
bottom, insert ‘ 1 See p. 312.’
377, line 22, insert reference number 1.
bottom, insert ‘ 1 See p. 273.’
384, line 7 from bottom, delete comma and insert full stop at
end.
390, bottom, delete “‘ and insert’”’.
395, line 3, end, insert reference number 1.
bottom, insert ‘ See p. 363.’
412, last line, for ‘toward’ read ‘ tow’rd.’

VOLUME IIiIl.

3, line 24, end, add‘ Kisari Mohan Ganguliand published by.’

14, line 30, end, add reference number 5 and ‘ The text also
allows the view that Farid dwelt on Mount
Sapad. See Vol. v, p. 30.’

15, Note 1, end, add ‘ There was no difficulty in finding an
additional rhyme without using ‘ Pashan.’
‘Gashan’ (much) rhymes with ‘ Pashan’ in
Vol. vill, p. 397 and note.

20, line 22, end, add reference number 1, and at bottom
2 GhavOleet, p.Ol.

36, line 8, for “ Tis’ vead ‘ ’Tis.’

45, line 23, for ‘that’ vead ‘ thou.’
184
Page

Page
Page
Page

Page
Page

Page
Page

Page
Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page

Page
>

Page

Page

Page

Page
Page
Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS

59, line 17 and elsewhere, for ‘ Almighty’ read ‘ almighty ’
when not absolute.

68, line 18, for ‘stoneand’ vead ‘ stone and.’

SB, UOte 2) end!) |ad daa peo) Ee

84, line 7 from bottom and elsewhere, for ‘ All-holy’ read
“all-holy ’’ when not absolute.

102, line 22 for ‘Omnipotent’ vead ‘ omnipotent.’

110, line 2 and elsewhere, for ‘ Who’ read ‘ who.’

6, for ‘ Whom’ read ‘ whom.’
130, line 11, add comma ai end.
134, line 6, end, add!
line m5, end, add “.

141, line 2 from bottom and elsewhere, for ‘ Holy’ read ‘ holy ’
when not absolute.

148, note, for “ Pehlevan ’ read ‘ Pehlewan’ and after ‘ donna’
delete comma

151, line 4 from bottom, add full stop at end.

172, note, for.‘ Car’ read ‘ car.’

191, line 12, for ‘ Abul’ vead ‘’Abu’l.’

194, line 8, for ‘ Khan’ vead ‘ Khan.’

213, line 22, for ‘ Oleader’ vead ‘ O leader.’

234, note, for ‘ Et’ read ‘et’ and for ‘ comblan’ read ‘ com-
blant.’

237, line 7; prefix “

241, line 22, delete ‘ far.’

250; NOG, for, Subavead «Sut.

275, line 10, end, delete !

285, line 8 from bottom, for ‘ fraicheur’ vead ‘ fraicheur.’
last line, add reference number 2.

287, side reference, for ‘ V. 1063’ read ‘ V. 1065’ and subse-
quent side references consecutively, i.e., ‘ V. 1066,’
“V. 1067,’ etc., up to page 305.

294, line 7, for ‘ buffalos’ read ‘ buffaloes.’

298, note, for ‘La’ read ‘la.’

304, line 11, delete semicolon and insert comma.

305, line 25, add side reference ‘ V. 1086,’ and read subsequent
side references consecutively, i.e., ‘V. 1087.’
“V. 1088,’ etc., up to page 356.

318, note, for “Il” vead ‘11.’

328, line 12, end, inservt semicolon.

348, line 15, add comma at end.

VOLUME IV.

v, line 5, end, delete full stop and insert —

ix, line 10, for ‘wrath’ read ‘ Wrath.’

8, line 10, end, add ‘ See Vol. vii, pp. 381, 422.’

31, line 6, delete comma and insert semicolon.

40, line 9, end, add reference number 1, and insert at botiom
“1Cf. Vol. i, p. 386 and note.’
Page
Page

Page
Page
Page
Page

Page
Page
Page

Page

Page

Page

Page

CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 185

85, note, prefix reference number I.

139, note 2, add ‘ It is interesting to find the dog appearing
in the Bock of Tobit in which there are Jranian
elements. Cf. Vol. iii, p. 271 and Encl, Brit.
Eith Ede sig vobtte

141, line 9, end, delete

143, line 6, from bottom, insert comma at end.

144, line 8, delete comma and insert semicolon.

150, line 8, for ‘ buffalos’ read ‘ buffaloes.’

§3. There appears to be a doublet here as Afrdsiydb is
first said to be beyond Jaz and then at Baigand,
7.e., in the neighbourhood first of the Jaxartes and
then of the Oxus, but the context favours the
latter position.

155, line 10, delete and insert ‘ He ranged the army’s centre
and its wings.’

256, line 1, delete and insert ‘ All filled with minstrelsy and
harp and wine.’

bottom, delete comma and insert semicolon.
259, line 7 from bottom, delete ‘ Barda’, a cavern’ and insert
“to Barda’, one’

262, note 2, Add ‘ The situation of Barda’ would, however,
make Lake Gokcha more appropriate. Cf.
p- 259.’

304, line 14, end, delete comma and insert semicolon.

324, line 12 from bottom, for ‘ shore’ read ‘ river?,’ and at
bottom add note ‘ 1 The Euphrates.’

325, line 8 after ‘city’ add reference number 1 and at
bottom add note ‘1Shurab. Cf. Vol. vii, p.
254-.

339, line 1, for ‘sea’ read ‘ river.’

340, line 3, for ‘sea’ read ‘ stream.’

344, line 16, for ‘sea’ read ‘ stream.’

25, for ‘sea’ read ‘ river.’
28, for ‘sea’ read ‘ stream.’
31, for ‘ sea’ read ‘ stream.’

346, line 18, end, add reference number 1, and at bottom add

note ‘1 Cf. Vol. v, p. 233 note.’

 

VOLUME V.

14, line 2 from bottom, end, add reference number 11, and at
bottom «“Spitama seems to mean ‘ White.’
Seen) 2, pina.

30, line 19, for ‘ Girdkuh’ vead ‘ Girdkuth.’

line 24, add ‘ It has been stated by an oriental authority

that Dizh Gumbadan (‘ the Domed Fort’) and
Girdkth were identical. See LEC, p. 365.’

71, line 13, for ‘his’ read ‘a.’
186
Page

Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page

Page
Page
Page

Page
Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page
Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS

«

71, line 17, end, add reference number 1 and at bottom ‘>In
Firdausi Nush Azar is the son of Asfandiyar,
but in Dakiki may of course be a brother and
the one referred to above.’

126, line 4, end, add reference number 1 and at bottom‘ » Cf.
Pp. 233 note.’

133, line 21, for ‘ wisdon’ read ‘ wisdom.’

160, line 23, end, add quotation mark.’

161, last line, end, insert full stop.

214, line 14, end, add quotation mark.’

277, line 8, insert full stop.

6 from bottom, end, insert semicolon.

238, Note) Tadd (Gi Bae: ae25On

VOLUME VI.

vi, line 3, for ‘ Married’ vead ‘ married.’

ix, line 14, for ‘Rumans’ read ‘ Rimans.’

3, line 8 from bottom, delete ‘ Rustam.’

7 from bottom, for ‘ Chubina’ read ‘ Chubina.’
4 from bottom, for ‘ Shirwi’ vead ‘ Shirwi’
6, line 21, for ‘ Muller’ read ‘ Miiller.’
15, line ro, for ‘legend’ read ‘ Legend.’
note 3,- add ‘ Cf. Vol. vii, p. 79.

17, line 1, for ‘ Mukaffa’ vead ‘ Mukaffa’’

39, line 6 from bottom, end, delete ? and insert!

64, line 8, for ‘ Ravi’ read ‘ Ravi.’

81, line 2, end, tnsert hyphen.

89, line 5, for ‘ Married’ read ‘married.’

98, line 14, end, imseyt comma.

133, line 4, end, tzsert semicolon.

135, line 12 from bottom, vead «He must not privily devise.’

10 from bottom, for ‘ wise’ read ‘ sage.’

136, line 4, end, insert!

137, line 7, end, tmsert comma.

150, bottom line, end, insevt comma.

154, line 13 from bottom, end, insert full stop.

161, line 20, end, insert reference number I.

bottom, insert note ‘ 1Cf. Vol. i, pp. 118, 132.’

207, line 7, after ‘above’ insert ‘ (p. 195).’ :

209, line ro, end, insert reference number 2, and at bottom add note
“2 Mohl, rightly according to Ndldeke (NIN, p. 26
and mole), reads ‘Samanians’ for ‘Ashkanians.’ The
former claimed descent from Bahram Chubina.’

210, line 13 from bottom, end, delete comma.

202; NOtC Wadd sGyne peo 5

231, line 4 from bottom, end, insert comma.

250, line g from bottom, fer ‘Chubina’ read ‘ Chibina.’

288, line 9, beginning, delete “.

291, line 10 from bcttom, after ‘Oh’ insert !

292, line 1, end, insert comma.
Page
Page
Page

Page

Page
Page

I- =
Page

Page

Page

Page
Page
Page

Page
Page
Page

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page

Page
Page

Page

CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 187

296, line 6 from bottom, for ‘ Riamdns’ read ‘ Rumans.’
298, line 13 from bottom, for ‘ Pars’ read ‘ Pars.’
304, bottom line, end, tnsevt comma.
312, line 3, for ‘respect’ read * respecteth ’ and for ‘thou
art ~~ thoustss
6, second note, prefix 2.
3, note, line 5 from bottom, end, tnsert comma.
7, line 7, for ‘Ambar’ read ‘ Ambar.’
line 8, for “’Abbasid’ read ‘ ’Abbasid.’
339, note, for ‘Shammas’ read ‘ Shammas.’
372, line 2 from bottom, for ‘the spring of’ read ‘a lake
near.’
bottom line, after ‘ birth-place’ add, reference number 8,
and at bottom add note ‘ * The lake in question
being the source of two rivers the expression
‘Spring’ used by Firdausi in connexion with
it is not whclly inappropriate.’
376, line 7 from bottom, for ‘ great’ read ‘ Great.’
387, line 12 from bottom, prefix “
402, line 1, end, insert comma.

VOLUME VII.

vii, line 4, for ‘SASANIAN’ read ‘ SASANTAN.’

xi, line 13 from bottom, for ‘ Feasts’ read ‘ Banquets.’

85, line 16 from bottom insert comma at end.

3 from bottom, for‘ Kharzarwan ’ read‘ Khazarwan.’

95, line 18 end delete comma and insert semicolon.

106, line 15, after ‘scabbards’ insert comma.

IIo, line 15, for ‘an as’ vead ‘as an.’

118, line 11 from bottom, for ‘ Irdn’ read ‘ [riin.’

155, line 9 from bottom, delete semicolon and insert comma.

156, line 6, after ‘ Hormisdas’ delete comma and insert ‘ III.

184, note, line 14 from bottom, after ‘bunch’ delete . and

insert ?

185, bottom note, prefix 4.

207, heading, for ‘KUBAD’ read ‘ KUBAD.’

209, line 2, after ‘below’ insert reference number 1, and at
bottom add ‘1Cf. MHP, ii, 77, RH, Bk. iii,
ch. 35 and note.’

line 3 from bottom, end, delete 1 and insert 2, and before
note delete 1 and insert 2.

217, line 4 from bottom. Sura appears to be identical with
Thapsacus of which Tiphsah (1 Kings, iv. 24)
meaning probably ford’ seems to have been
the Hebrew form. The army of Cyrus the
Younger in his expediticn against his brother
Artaxerxes II. (Mnemon) crossed the river there
on foot. Xenophon, Anabasis, I, iv, 17.
188

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Page

Page

Page I

Page

Page

Page 2
Page 2

Page
Page

Page

Page ;

Page
Page
Page
Page
Page

Z2sTis
231,
239

251s
263,
275;
300.
331,
348,
369,
395,

400,

410,

CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS

line 5 from bottom, after ‘ crown’ insert comma.
bottom line, delete full stop and insert comma.
and 247, heading, read ‘ NUSHIRWAN.’
line 13 from bottom, for ‘ Garshasp’ read ‘ Gashasp.’
line 6 from bottom, delete comma and insert semicolon,
bottom line, end, insert comma.
line 11, insert comma after ‘ For’ and ‘ know.’
line 4, delete ‘the’ and insert ‘ from.’
line 20, for “ Sahh’ read ‘ Shah.’
line 18, for ‘ frowning face’ vead ‘ looks afrown.’
line 10, for ‘ was’ read “ were.’

11, for “ were’ read ‘ was.’
line 1, for ‘ crown’ read ‘ treasure.’

2, for ‘ treasure, for’ read ‘ crown because.’
bottom line, for ‘ Almighty’ read ‘ almighty.’

VOLUME VIII

v, line 17, for ‘ answer’ read ‘ Answer.’

viii,

line 13 from bottom, add ‘to Caesar.’

xv, line 20) fay | PCH AP vead “HAR?
2, line 21, for “ Khan‘s read ‘ Khan’s.’
g1, note, for ‘ Parwiz read ‘ Parwiz.’

122,
138,
143,
147,
153,
189,
190,

1Ql,

343,

line 14, delete first hyphen.

line 10, delete id.

line 10, inseyt comma after ‘ Letter’ and ‘ Parmida.’

line 11, for ‘ great’ read ‘ Great.’

line 18, delete full stop and insert comma.

line 16, for ‘Zab’ read ‘ Zab.’

line 16, foy ‘ Garabzin,’ ‘ Galabzin’ read ‘ Garabzin’

“ Galabzin ’

line 12, according to Muir’s ‘ The Life of Mohammad,’
edited by T. H. Weir (1923), p. 431 note, the
battle of Dhu Kar was fought A.D. 611.

note, joy, POCHIAR svead) “TAP:

line 6 from bottom, after ‘ take’ insert reference number 1
and at bottom add ‘ 1See Vol. 5, p. 156 note.’

justify line 25.

line 22, delete full stop and insert comma.

line 5, for ‘ Luhrasp’ read ‘ Luhrasp.’

line 6, for ‘ Asfanfiyar’ read ‘ Asfandiyar.’

line 1, insert comma after ‘ one.’

line 4 from bottom, for ‘ and readers of the stars’ read
‘with the astrologers.’

line 5, for ‘ great’ read ‘ Great.’

line 20, for ‘achieved’ read ‘ accomplished.’

line 21, end, delete full stop and insert comma.

line 2 from bottom, delete comma.

line 13, for ‘brave’ read ‘ Brave.’

bottom, for ‘in haste’ read ‘ with speed.’

bottom, for ‘ gory’ read ‘ glory.’
CORRECTIONS AND ADDITIONS 189

Page 348, line 6 from bottom, for ‘in a letter to the king.’
vead * to the monarch in a letter.’

Page 353, line 5, for ‘If’ read‘ It’

Page 362, line 11 from bottom, delete hyphen.

Page 374, line 8, for ‘ Ot’ read ‘ Of.’

Page 411, line 8, for ‘the’ read ‘ thy.’

Page 421, line 12 from bottom, for ‘ Galinus ’ read ‘ Galinush.’
 
GENERAL INDEX

This Index and the General Table of Contents in this volume are

complementary.

A

AAISHMA Dagiva, demon, ili., 272
=Asmodeus probably, iii,
272
Aban, genius, iii, 287, 328
’Abbas, Arab chief, attacks Hur-
muzd, viii, 93
*Abbasid, “Abbasids, Muhamma-
dan dynasty, vi, 327
rise of, i, 13
fall of, i, 14
Abbreviations, General List of,
ix, 135
Abdaas, bishop, vi, 372
Abraham, patriarch, vi, 65
Abtin Grae. Athwya), mythi-
cal Iranian hero, husband
of Faranak and father of
Faridun, ix, 53, 103
legend of, i, 145
Zabhak slays, i, 151, 153
Faridtiin avenges, i, 170
mythological origin of, i,
L7L, 072) L74
Abu-’Ali Muhammad, Persian
poet, Shahnama of, i, 69
Abt’ Bakr, the first Khalifa
(A.D. 632-4), 1, 12, 1x, 76
begins war with Persian
Empire, ix, 66

Abt Dulaf, friend of Firdausi, i,

Sone oe: :
assists Firdaust, i, 35
reciter of the Shahnama,

i. 39

 

References to the latter are in Italics.

Abt’l ’Abbas Fazl bin Ahmad,
minister of Mahmud and
perhaps a patron cf Fir-
dausi, i, 30, 100, iv, 141

account of, i, 36
disgrace of, may have af-
fected Firdausi, i, 37

Abt’l Fazl, minister under the
Samanids, father of Abu
?Ali al Bal’ami who trans-
lated Tabari, vii. 430

patron of Ridagi, vii, 383

Abt’l Kasim (Firdausi, q.v.), i,
24-385 99, LL2, iv, TAO;
VEE OOs) LiLOre Villy e205 207,
Vili, 28

Abiw’l Kasim of Gurgan, shaikh,
iii, IQI

dream of, about Firdausi, iii,
IgI

Abt’ Muzaffar. See Nasr.

Abt Manstr bin Abdu’r Razzak,
prince of Tus, i, 67 seq.,

vi, 16
Shahnama of, vi, 16
probably compiled by

Magi for, i, 69, viii, 71,

a
importance of, for Fir-
dausi, viii, 73.
Abu Mansir bin Muhammad, son
of above (?), 739
patron of Firdausi, i, 29, 110
murdered, i, 29, III
praise of, i, 110
advice of, to
II!

Firdausi, i,

191
192 GENERAL INDEX

Abii Raihan Muhammad. See
Albirunt.
Abu Talib, uncle of Muhammad,
rp a
Abu ’Ubaida, Arab general, ix, 66
supersedes Khalid in Syria,
1x. 66

| Afrasiyab—cont.

Abi ’Ubaida, Arab general, ix, |

67

made commander in Persian
campaign, ix, 67

slain, ix, 67

Accession of a Shah, ceremony
at, vi, 409

Achaemenid, Achaemenids, the,
first historical Persian
dynasty, 1, 64, v, Io, 281,

vi, 194, 197, 198

Achshunwar. See Akhshunwar.

’Ad, father of Shaddad, qg.v.

Arab tribe, viii, 276

*Adan, seaport and territory in
southern Arabia, vi, 386

Adar. See Azar.

Adarbad, son of Mabraspand,
Zoroastrian Saint, v, 16
note

ordeal of, v, 16 note

Aden. See ’Adan.

Adonis, iv, 315

/Egean sea, vi, 204

Afrasiyab, son of Pashang, ruler
of Turan and one of the
arch-enemies of fran, 142-
T5351) 42,557 27 eds,
14, COwseqe. 207 7Onmeon.
98 seq., 118, 127, 149, 184,
189, 242 seq., 257 seq., 283,
286, 288, 322 seq., 335, 347
séq., 360 seq., 369, 373,
380, 381, 386, 392 seq.,
401 séq., ili, 8, 12,13,15, 23,

26,27; 20, <AOw Aa AG). 73.1

76 seqg., 100, 108, 123, 134,
136, 143, 146, 152, 153,
164, 165, 1760) 1é3F 185,
193, 200 Ség., 207 seq., 21T,
203 A229) 22am e2oNe AT.
260) S€q.,, 208,270, 277,
séq., 285, 295, 298, 300,
329, 333, 337; 339, 340

seq., 1v. 7, 8, 17, 19 seq.,
25, 29, 46, 56, 58 seq., 65,
66, 70, 75, seq., 83, 89, 93,
94, 96, 103, 108, IIo, 113,
TL 7, 2S eZ Osman mma Oe
159 Seq., 192. seq., 235, 252,
253, 273, 287, 289, 294 v,
12 eh Sn 2 ed ane OznEne. On
203;,. 205), Vins 67.0 alla ie
240 and mote, vii, 330,
335, 337, 359, Vili, 242,
200, 349, ix, 25, 103

one of the Zoroastrian triad
of evil, i, 59 and note

mythological origin of, i,
337

first mention of, in Shah-
nama, i, 342
advocates war with Nau-
dar, i, 343

bidden by Pashang to in-
vade fran, i, 343

sends Shamasas and Khaz-
arwan to invade Sistan, i,
345

marches to Dahistan, i, 346

writes to Pashang, i, 346

encourages Barman to chal-
lenge the franians to
single combat, i, 347

rewards Barman, 1,348

fights with Naudar, i, 348
and seq.

encounters Karan, i. 350

victorious, i, 350, 352

beleaguers Naudar in Dah-
istan, 1, 353

sends Kurtkhan to attack
Pars, 1,353

takes Naudar and _ other
chiefs prisoners, i, 355

hears of the death of Bar-
man and bids Wisa pur-
sue Karan, 1, 356

hears of the Turkman de-
feats, 1, 362

sends for, and slays, Naudar,
i, 362

spares the other captives at
Ighriras’ request, i, 363
GENERAL INDEX 193

Afrasiyab, imprisons the cap-

tives at Sari, i, 363
advances to Rai, i, 363
wroth with, and slays, Igh-

riras, i, 367
fights with Zal, i, 368
Pashang’s wrath

374
invades Iran, i, 374 seq.,

381
sends Kultn to

Rustam, i, 382
fights with Arabs for fran

and takes it, li, 92

intercept

with, i,

king of Turan and Chin, ii, |

99
expelled from fran by Kai
Kaus and Rustam, ii, ror
fights with the Seven
Warriors, l., Tir ‘seq.

nearly taken prisoner by |
Rustam, ii, 14, 116, 354, |

lii, 242, 250 and note
plot of, against Suhrab and
Rustam, ii, 129
gifts of, to Suhrab, ii, 130
identical with Astyages in
legend, ii, I91
referred to, il, 322, 347, 394,
lii, 206, iv, 145, 150, 194
invades fran, ii, 224 seq.
dream of, li, 232, 243, 297,
LV 705 207
determines to sue for peace

and sends hostages, li, |

235 seq.

receives Zanga and consults |

Pirdny eile 2 4Sed.-

sends Piran to
Siyawush, ii, 2538

plays at polo with Siya-
wush, li, 264

marries Farangis to Siya-
wush, il, 275

recalls Siyawush, from
Gang-dizh, ii, 285
sends Garsiwaz to Siya-

wushgird, ii, 289

welcome |

 

deceived by Garsiwaz res- |

pecting Siyawush, ii, 296
seq.

VOL. IX,

Afrasiyab, sends

Garsiwaz to

summon Siyawush and
Farangis to court, li, 300
seq.

attacks, takes, and has

Siyawush executed, li, 314
seq.

appealed to by Farangis, ii,
37

ill-treatment of Farangis by,
Ligeg 20,1322
referred to, iv, 204

appeal of Piran to, ii, 324
referred to, iv, 205

spares Farangis, li, 325, and
her son Kai Khusrau, il,
327

interview of, with Kai Khus-
rau, ii, 332
referred to, iv, 205

sends Surkha against the
franians, ii, 344
marches to avenge Sur-
kha, ii, 348

fights with Tus, ii, 353

rescue of, from Rustam by
Human, ii, 354

crosses the sea of Chin, ii,
350

consults Piran about Kai
Khusrau, ii, 356

returns, il, 362

vengeance of, on Tran, ii,
363

pursues Kai
388 seq.

disgraces Piran, ii, 390

turns back at the Jihun, ii,
394

Kai Khusrau’s oath to take
vengeance on, iil., 21

hears of the approach of

Khusrau, ii,

the f[ranian host, _ iii,
71

bids Piran gather troops,
Wie7 151179

numbers the host, ili, 79
loss of kindred of, in battle,
iii, 94
rewards Pirdn, iii, 106
reinforces Piran, iii, 118
N
Afrasiyab,

GENERAL INDEX

announces to _ his
host, ili, 242

exhorted by his host to con-
tinue the wart, 11, 243, 249

makes his preparations, iii,
243, 250

sends Farghar to spy on
Rustam, iii, 250

consults with Shida, iii, 250

describes Rustam, iii, 251

receives Farghar’s report, |

iii, 253

consults with Piran, ili, 253

bids Piran continue the war,
lil, 254
sends Shida to summon
Puladwand, iii, 255
consults Piladwand, ili, 256
interferes in the fight be-
tween Rustam and Pulad-
wand, iii, 263
withdraws
Machin, ili, 265
goes in pursuit of Rustam
and is defeated, iii, 280
hears of the case of Bizhan
and Manizha iii, 301
consults Kurakhan, iii, 301
sends Garsiwaz to search
Manizha’s palace, lii, 301
sentences Bizhan to death,
lili, 304
respites Bizhan, ili, 308
imprisons Bizhan, ili, 309
disgraces Manizha, ili, 309
escapes from Rustam, iii
348
bids Piran prepare for war,
il, 349
arrays the host against
Rustam, ili, 350
flees from Rustam, ili, 352
goes to Khallukh, iv, to
addresses his nobles, iv, 10
sends Shida to Kharazm,
UV; le
Piran against fran, iv, 11
reinforcements and bids
him break off negotia-
tions with Giv, iv, 20

to Chin and |

| Afrasiyab, receives tidings from
chiefs the defeat of his |

 

Piran,iv, 77

=king of Gang, iv. 134

Kai Khusrau’s great war
with, 152, Iv, 135 seq.

encamped at Baigand (Kun-
duz), iv, 151

hears ill tidings of Piran and
of the host, iv, 151

distress of, iv, 152

swears to be avenged on Kai

Khusrau, iv, 152

hears of the advance of Kai
Khusrau, iv, 153

harangues and equips his
host, iv, 153

patrols the Jihun with boats,
iv, 153

holds a council, summons
Kurakhan, and crosses the
Jihtin, iv, 154

sends Kuradkhan with half
the host to Bukhara, iv,
154

marches to Amwi, iv, 154

encamps in Gilan, iv, 155

arrays his host, iv, 155

takes his post at the centre,
lv, 155

gives Shida command of the
left wing, iv, 155

sends Jahn to guard Shida’s
rear, iv, 155

gives a grandson command
of the right wing, iv,
156
commands to Gurdgir,

Nastuh, Ighriras, and
Garsiwaz, iv, 150

proposes to invade Nimruz,
iv, 156

reviews the host and pre-
pares to encounter Kai
Khusrau, iv, 158

urged by Shida not to
delay the attack, iv, 159

reply of, iv, 160

wishes to meet Kai Khusrau
in single combat, iv, 161

sends Shida on an embassage
to Kai JXhusrau, iv, 161
Afrasiyab,

GENERAL

hears of Shida’s
death, iv, 176

grief of, iv, 176

commands in person against |

Kai Khusrau, iv, 179

sends Jahn to the left, iv,
180

reinforced by Garsiwaz, iv,
18t

forced by Garsiwaz and
Jahn to quit the field, iv,
182

returns to camp, iv, 183

abandons his camp and re-

 

crosses the Jihuin, iv, 184 |

joins forces with Kurakhan,
iv, 186

stays at Bukhara, iv, 186

withdraws to Gang-bihisht,
iv, 187

reinforced by Kakula, iv,
188

sends troops to Chach, iv, |

188
under Tawurg desertward,
iv, 188

marches to meet Kai Khus-
rau, iv, 190

commands the centre, iv, 190
hears of Kurakhan’s defeat |

and return, iv, 193

hears that Rustam is ad-
vancing, iv, 194

fails in attempt to surprise
Rustam and withdraws to
Gang-bihisht, iv, 194,
seq.

asks aid from the Faghfutr,
iv, 196

prepares Gang-bihisht for a
siege, iv, 197

besieged in Gang-bihisht,
iv, 198, 208 seq.

offers terms of peace to Kai
Khusrau, iv, 203

rallies his troops at the
storming of Gang-bihisht,
iv, 209

escapes, iv, 2IT

gets possession of the trea-
sures of Piran, iv, 219

 

INDEX 195
Afrasiyab, arrays his host to

fight with Kai Khusrau,
lv, 220

offers Kai Khusrau peace or
single combat, iv, 221

fights a general engagement
against Kai Khusrau, iv,
2232220

defeated and escapes by
flight, iv, 227

army, of, surrenders to Kai
Khusrau, iv, 228

takes refuge at Gang-dizh,
iv, 230

captive kindred of, sent to
Kai Kats by Kai Khus-
rau, iv, 232

Kai Kats on, iv, 237

KKhusrau’s inquiries concern-
ing, iv, 247

hears of Kai Khusrau’s ap-
proach and quits Gang-
dizh, iv, 248

searched for by Kai Khus-
rau, iv, 248

fears of the franians concern-
ing, iv, 249

Kai Khusrau takes counsel
with Kai Kats about, iv,
258

wanderings and wretched
plight of, iv, 259

takes refuge in a cave near
Barda’, iv, 259

lament of, overheard’ by
Hum, iv, 260

capture of, by Hum, iv,
261
Darmesteter on, iv, 136

pitied and unbound by Him,
iv, 262

escapes into lake Urumiah,
iv, 262 and note

attracted by the voice of
Garsiwaz, iv, 265

holds converse with Garsi-
waz, iv, 266

recapture of, by Hum, iv,
266

slain by Kai Kbusrau, iv,
268
190

Afrasiyab, daughter of=Fa-
rangis, iv, 304
Khan of Chin descended

from, vii, 334

hoard of, vili, 148, 406
Africa, vi, 30
Afrigh, king of Khirazm, ii, 190
*Afrit, genie, 1, 42
Agani, Sargon I. of, v, 293
Age, old, Firdausi’s lament over

his, li, 336

Golden. See Golden.

Aghra¢ratha (Ighriras, q.v.), iv, |

137

Aghrérad (Ighriras, q.v.), i, 338

Aghriras. See Ighriras.

Agni, Vedic personification of
fire, li, 25

Ahdnamak (Andarznamak), Pah-
lavi treatise, v1, 257

Ahmad, son of Isma’ il, Samanid,
Vil, 383

Ahmad, son of Sahl, lord of Marv,
Vie ZOO, eZOL

Ahmad, Fazl son of.
*Abbas Fazl.

Ahmad Hasan Maimandi, minis-
ter of Mahmud, i, 32, 39,

See Abu’l

45

Ahmad ibn Muhammad, patron
of Firdausi, i, 29

Ahran, Rtiman chief, 754, iv,
342 Seq., 353

bidden by Caesar to slay the

dragon of Mount Sakila,

lV, 342

takes counsel with Mirin,
iv, 342

referred by Mirin to Hishwi,
Iv, 344

Ahran, required by Gushtasp to
furnish him with arms, iv,

345

goes with Gushtasp and

Hishwi to Mount Sakila, |

iv, 346
Hishwi and, welcome Gush-
tasp on his return, iv,

347

gives gifts to Gushtasp, iv,

347

 

 

GENERAL INDEX

Ahran, has the dead dragon con-
veyed to Caesar’s court,
iv, 348

marries Caesar’s
daughter, iv, 348

Mirin and, display their
accomplishment on the
riding-ground, iv, 349

Caesar’s wrath with Mirin
and, iv, 351

Mirin and, send a scornful
message to Caesar, iv, 353
set to guard the baggage,

iv, 355

Ahriman, the Zoroastrian Evil
Principle, sometimes used
metaphorically, 739,1, 5, 6,
50, 134, 138, 159, 194, 205,
218; 23 0n 236 124 2455
2S SL a SOOM Mls S442),
43, 51, 53, 58, 78, 160,
200s. 20A Zi 12/50; 200)
303, 315, 324, 358, 361,
3 7/Aee SCO AO Sa tSCOPusmmelil
L7, 23,204, 226,251,200;
275, 277, 287, 293, 294,
300, 303, 304, 314, 316,
30S) 3305 aly 235) 4) Seqe,
Ab AO OO, LOS sla 4 eet 2 Or
130, 9002) lO3)) 70,6 200)
243, 272, 288, 342, 348,
3525 V, 17, 33, 36, 45, 50,
905/09) 1035022123) 125)

third

147, 177, 198, 206, 246,
27 2 Ome wis pLOO MT 2.
206, 240, 281, 290, 299,
318, 384; vu, 89, 233,
ZOOS naa ls A200, 8 52, G235%
334, 359, 366, 367, 3690;
Vi ELO, 20, 22) 50,107, 070;

WILD) 2LOe 2O 24a.
293, 333, 364, 421; ix,
8, 18, 73, 74, 79, 91

envies Gaitimart, i, 118

son of (the Black Div), i, 119
Surtish warns Gaiimart

against, i, 119

ridden by Tahmuras, i, 125,
127

=Zahhak, i, 162

=Salm and Tur, i, 194
GENERAL

Ahriman=<Afrdsiyab, i, 366
Faith of, ii, 358 ; vi, 281, 290
=idolater, viii, 54
=Bandwi or Gustaham,

viii, 89
=Kharrad, son of Barzin,
viii, III
= Bahram Chubina, viii, 295
Ahuna_ Vairya, Zoroastrian
sacred formula, v, 17
Ahura Mazda (Urmuzd), the
Zoroastrian Good Prin-
CIplows | tTO. 235°) ai, 25
OLS ive 137
Ahwaz, city and _ province
(IXhuzistan, Susiana), i,
286 ; vi, 35, 199, 298, 357;
Vil, 5197; TOS, 201,
224; viii 400, 402
Airan-vég6 ({ran-vej q.v.), ii, 189
Akem Manau, Zoroastrian de-
mon, iii, 271, 272
=Akiman=Akwan, iii 272
assails Zarduhsht v, 17
Akesines (Chinab), Indian river,

vi, 31, 64
Akhast, Turdnian hero, r5r; |
iv, 105
chosen to fight with Zanga, |
iv, 97
slain by Zanga, iv, 106
Akhshunwar (Achshunwar),

Haitalian king, vii, 160
Akki, foster-father of Sargon I

of Agani, v, 293
Aknaton, Pharaoh

dynasty)

(XVIII

214,

 

lover of peace like Yazda- |

gird, son of Shapur, vi, 371
*Akr Babil, prison, viii, 194, 196
Akiman. See Akem Manau.

Akwan, div, 150, iii, 270 seg., 280 |

seq., 284, 309
Story of, iii, 271
Professor Néldeke on the,
iil; -270
Firdausi on, iii, 273, 281
boulder of, iii, 271, 276, 309,
343, 344, 347
removed from pit’s mouth
by Rustam, ili, 345

INDEX 197
Akwan, appears in the form of
an onager, ili, 273 seq.
pursued by Rustam, ili, 275

foils Rustam, iii, 276
takes Rustam at a disad-
vantage, ill, 270
offers Rustam a choice of
deaths, 11, 277
outwitted by Rustam, iii,
277
slain by Rustam, iii, 281
described by Rustam, iii, 282
Al, place, ix, 93
Alans (Alani), people, now the
Ossetes of the Caucasus,
Fale. tlie, uly Aig he shies Mig
60,5055 | 30D 3) Vi, 305)
Viil, 360
invade [ran, i, 19
castle of the, i, 223
taken by Karan, 1, 223,
seq.
castellan of,
Karan, 1, 22
monarch of, vi, 395
Nushirwan’s dealings with,
Vli, 216, 239 seq.
King of=Khusrau Parwiz,
Vili, 208, 209, 213

duped by

| Alar, a village in Ardshir-Khurra

q-U., Vi, 205

| Albirini, Abi Raihan Muham-

mad, Oriental author and
chronolegist (A.D. 973-
1048), ii, 189

account of Alfir (Gangdizh ?)
by, ii, 190

Alburz, mountain-range south of

the Caspian, also mythi-
cal range (Hara-bere-
zaiti) surrounding the
Carthy W425 A 7h) 045s
158, 235, 248, 250, 277,
208, 351, 3735 U,-E1, 23;
27, 79, 96, 144, 336, 401 ;
Al? Oh al, os Ol mev2O2
WL 7) ee OS

Faridtin taken by his mother
EOne te diy 2

Zal cast away, and found,
upon, i, 241 seq.
198
Alburz, Kai Kubad brought by

Rustam from, i, 382 seq. |
Kai Kats’ buildings on, ii, |

8I

Aleppo (Chalybon - Beroea), city |

in northern Syria, vii,
218; vili, 41
Alexander I, king of Epirus
Italian expedition of, vi, 12
attributed to Alexander
the Great, vi, 12

Alexander the Great (Sikandar |

q.v.), B.C. 356-323, son of
Philip Il of Macedon and
his queen Olympias, I, 14,

AON Ti Si SCOn aves AL
V, 30%; Vi, 19358194, 204,
252; 2530 3755) 1Vily 0505

barrier of, i, 16; vi, 78

legend of, in the Kuran,
vi, 78

persecutor of Zoroastrian-
ism, i, 15, 59, 61, 63, 338

paternity of, i, 55 and note ;
vi, 16, 18

one of the Zoroastrian triad
of evil, 1, 59 and note

said to have burnt the Zoro-
astrian scriptures, i, 63

Zoroastrianism under, i, 63

Era of, ii, 190

accompanied by experts to
the East, vi, II

Romance of, origin
growth of, vi, 12 seq.
diagram to illustrate, vi,

84

Syriac Christian Legend of,
See Syriac.

Muhammad’s references to,

and

in the Kuran, vi, 15, 77 |

Persian national hero, how
he became, vi, 15
cities founded by, vi, 13,

18

name, Persian legend of his, |
vi, 19

Aristotle, tutor of, vi, 29

letter to, vi, 68

correspondence about the |

succession with, vi, 81

 

GENERAL INDEX

Alexander the Great, Roxana
(Rushanak) and, vi, 30, 32

reign of, first years of, in
history and romance, vi,

30
Darius’ banquet, his flight
from, vi, 30

his pursuit of, vi, 31

murderers of, his treat-
ment of them in history
and romance, vi, 32, 33

daughter of, marries, vi,

Fakirs and, vi, 61

Calanus and, vi, 61

Porus and, historical ac-
count of, vi, 63
camp of, his visit to, vi,64

iron steeds, his device of, vi,
64

stature of, vi, 64

Cleophis and, vi, 65

Ammon, Oasis of, his visit

to, vi, 65

Candace (Kaidafa) and, vi,
65 seq.

Antigonus (Naitkun),  as-

sumes name of, vi, 66
Plutarch’s Life of, vi, 67
Brahmans, visit of, to the,

vi, 67
Indus mistaken for the Nile
by, vi, 68
marvels of his return-jour-

ney, vi, 69
admiral of (Nearchus), vi, 69
Amazons and, vi, 12, 72

legend of, vi, 72
Gloom and Fount of Life,

legend of his expedition

to, in the Pseudo-Cal-
listhenes, vi, 74 seq.
Andreas, his cook, legend of,

vi, 76

in the Kuran, vi, 77
Will of, vi, 81
death of, vi, 82
dispute over his place of

interment, vi, 82
corpse of, taken to Memphis,

vi, 82
GENERAL

Alexander, the Great, interred at
Alexandria, vi, 82
tomb of, vi, 82
Mas’tidi on, vi, 82
S. Chrysostom on, vi, 82
wars on the death of, vi,
197
Alexander, son of Alexander the
Great and Cleophis (?), vi,

65
Alexandria (Iskandariya q.v.),
city and sea-port in |

Egypt, vi, 13, 15, 17, 83
founded by Alexander the
Great, vi, 13
Pseudo-Callisthenes
inated at, vi, 13
Alexander, the Great, buried
at, vi, 82
his tomb at, vi, 82
Mas’tdi on, vi, 82 |
S. Chrysostom on, vi, 82
Alfir (Gangdizh ?), palace-fort- |
tress of the capital of
Kharazm, ii, 190 |
Al Hadr. See Hatra. |
’Ali, husband of Fatima, daugh- |
ter of Muhammad, and
fourth Khalifa (A.D. 656 |
—661)
Muhammad on, i, 12, 106
cult of, 1, 13
known as ‘‘ the Lion,” i, 13,
107
assassination of, i, 13 ©
Firdausi’s references to, i,
24, 37, 4°, 41, 106, 107;
ii, 337 and note
the Dilamite, friend and
helper of Firdausi, i, 35;
oto
transcriber of the Shah-
nama, 1, 39
Alif, terminal, Firdausi’s use of, |
iii, 283
Al Iskandarts. See Halai.
Al Khidr (Khisr q.v.), the Green |
Prophet, vi, 78 and note |

Alkius, Turanian hero, ii, 114

orig- |

Ali,

 

 

INDEX 199
Alkus, fights with, and worsts,
Zawara, li, 115
slain by Rustam, ii, 115
Allah, Muhammadan name of
the Deity, 1, 50
Al Mansur, ’Abbasid Khalifa
(A.D. 754-775): founder of
Baghdad, vi, 254
Almas, river, ili, 251
Alp-Arselan (Arslan), Seljuk Sul-
tan (A.D. 1063-1073), HU,
219 note
Alptigin, founder of the Ghazni-
vid dynasty, 1, 20
Altuniya, place, ix, 92
Alwa, Rustam’s spear-bearer,
slain by Kamus, 149,
iii, 188

Alwa, Iranian hero, probably

identical with the above,
v, 166
slain by Nush Azar, Vv;
226
Amasis, vill, 193
Amazons, their disputed visit to
Alexander, the Great, vi,
12, 72
origin of, vi, 71
described, vi, 153 Séq-
Sikandar’s correspondence
with, and visit to, vi, 153

| seq.
| Ambar (Anbar, Piriz - Shapur),

city on the left bank of
the Euphrates some forty
miles west of Baghdad,
founded by Shapur son of
Urmuzd (Sapor II.) The
word means “ granaries.”’
vi, 327; viii, 188
foundation of, attributed to

the Azdites, 1, IT

Ambassadors, instances of kings
and chiefs going in person
as ambassadors or spies,
vi, 325

Ambih, place, ili; 41

Amen-Ra, Egyptian god per-
sonated by Nectanebus,
vi, 16
200

Ameshapentas, the, personifica-

tions of good qualities in |

Zoroastrian theology, ii,
277i) Vie U5aSege

Amida (Diyarbakr), city on the
upper Tigris, vil, 187

Amin, ’Abbasid Khalifa, (A.D.
809-813), i, 14

Ammianus Marcellinus (4th cen-
tury A.D.) Roman histor-
ian, v, 13

Ammon, Oasis of, Alexander the |

Great’s visit to, vi, 30, 65

‘Ammuriya, Ruman stronghold
Asia Minor between |

in
Sivri Hisar and Ak-Shahr
probably representing the
ancient Amorium but
sometimes confounded
with Angora (Angutriya)

the ancient Ancyra fur- |

ther to the north-east, vi,
23 note, 89, vill, 46 (Cf.
LEC. pp. 134, 153)
Failakiis marches
against Dardab, vi, 2
Amorium. See ’Ammuriya.

from,

Amr, Arab chief, attacks Hur- |

muzd, vill, 03

Amul, city in Mazandaran, i, 145,
177, 289, 298, 344, 366,
367 si all, LO, Ost evar Oqus

Vil CO) 2375). Vill, 355, |
356, 358, 392; ix, 86
Amul. See Amwi.

Amulet, of Kai Khusrau, iv, 133
given by Zarduhsht to As-
fandiyar, v, 130
(Amul, Amtyah, now
Charjti), city on the left
bank cf the Oxus where
crossed by the route from
Marv to Bukhara, iv, 11,

Amwi

65, 154, 184, 206; vii,
91 and note, 331, 357, 359;
Vill, 354

Anabdéh, vi, 32

Anesthetics, employment of, i
236, 321 seq.

See Ambar.

See Ammuriya.

,

Anbar.
Ancyra.

GENERAL INDEX

Andalus (Land of the West or of
the Vandals), Spain, 159,
Vi, OO" L22133

| queen of (Ixaidafa q.v.), vi,

121 seq.
Andaman, [ranian noble, viii,
202

_ Andarab, town in Afghanistan
between Balkh and Kabul,

iv, 65
Andariman, Turanian hero, 757,
il, 2OAN+ waive ZO a2

fights with Gustaham, iv, 87
steed of, slain by Hajir, iv,
87
rescued by the Turkmans,
LV 7;
chosen to fight with Gurgin,
iv, 97
slain by Gurgin, iv, 104
Andariman (Vandaremaini),
brother of Arjasp, v, 12,
141, 155
commands one wing of the
host, v, 46
executed by Asfandiyar, v,
158
Andarznamak (Ahdnamak),
Pahlavi treatise, vi, 257
| Andiv, country, viil, 313
Andiyan, franian warrior, 172
Vili, 225, 257, 259, 269, 293,
294, 290
deceived by Caesar’s talis-
man, vill, 273
Bahram Chubina writes to,
Vili, 285
receives Kirman, viii, 313
Andreanticus, sea, vi, 77
Andreas, Alexander the Great’s
cook,
legend of, vi, 76 seq.
in Iuran, vi, 77
Androphagoi, the, iii, 191
Anestres Castri=Nushirwan, vii,
383
Angora. See ’Ammiuriya.
Angra Mainyu=Ahriman, ii, 28
Animals, domestication of, i, 126
Ant, the, Firdausi’s plea for, i,
201 and note

 
GENERAL

Antakiya (Antioch), city in
Syria on the Orontes, 167,

vili, 41
taken by Nushirwan, vii,

218, 258 seq.

Antigonus (Naitkin), name as- |

sumed by Alexander the

Great in legend, vi,
66
Antioch. See Antakiya.

New, vii, 218, 259
Antiochus, Macedonian general,
vi, 76
Antiochus Sidetes, ii, 80, 81

Aogemaide, Pahlavi treatise, iv, |

136
Antipater, regent in Macedonia

for Alexander the Great, |

intrigued against
Olympias, vi, 82
Aphrodite, goddess, iv, 315
Apollo, god, and the Python,
Vi, 203
Apologues, i,
Ui, 332:5
47; Vi, 310;

242, 265, 285;
Lv Oe 2s. 2S.
ix, 86

by |

Apothegms, i, 259, 260; II, 157, |

158,
298,
357;
167,

170,
300,
383 5
188,

224, 254,
313, 315, 339,
ill, 53, 91, 96,
22 ZOO e277,
301, 316, 341, 348, 359,
S505 lv, 03,9320 33,35)
39, 59, 93, 108, 121, 131,
268; v, 78, 105, 168, 214,
242, 249, 250, 265; vi,

273, |

50, 303, 343; Vii, 17, 18, |
20, 42, 270, 277, 296, 301, |

403; Vill, I19, 166, 206,
ATR 22 Tee 35) 205) 56 ix,
87, 88, 110

Apprentice, a merchant’s, enter-

tains, and finds favour
with, Bahram Gur, vii, |
40 seq.

Apries (Pharoah-Hophra, B.C.
589-570), vi, 16

Apsheron, peninsula on_ the

western shore of the Cas-
pian, i, 58, note

Aptya. See Abtin.

INDEX 201
Arab, Arabs, 162, 163, ii, 79, 81,
GoreMUnetawe iv, LAs Vv,

31; vi, 66, 171, 209, 254,
B20 S6y:,, 377, 325; 399,
398, 402, 406; vii, 10,
107,201, 210, 244, 245,
247; viil, 67, 94, 188, 190,
I9I, 208, 230, 241, 250,
250 + eK, «915, 25, 00; 69,
70, 72, 75 Seq., 79, 89, 92,
Q4 Seq., 114, 117

migration of, northward, i,
II

raids of, into Persian terri-
EOGYsy ly Lene Wilh uek nels
a9?

domination of, over [ran, i,
I2 seq.

king = Mardas, 1, 135
—Zanhak, i £39) 275

rebellion of, against Kai
Kaus, ii, 83

Afrasiyab fights with, for
fran, ii, 92

Darab demands tribute from
Vise

steed, i, 243, 25I, 290; Vi,
380 ; viii, 126, 302 ; 1x, II

cymbal, vi, 244

invasion of, viii, 72, 93; 1x,
3, 65 seq.

withdraw, vili, 96

sage, sages, vii, 406
quoted, vii, 277

tribes, ix, 65

triumph of, over Dhu Kar,
ix, 66

chieftain, incites Abu Bakr
to invade Persia, ix, 66

concentrate at Kadisiya, ix,
67

booty found by, at Ctesi-
phon (?), ix, 68

annex Mesopotamia, ix, 68
Khiuzistan, ix, 68

—— Na eK 2

seal, ix, 82

=:Sa’ad, ix, 84

defeated, ix, 85

Nushirwan’s dream of, vill,
66 seq., ix, 92
202

Arabia, ii, 100; vi, 70, 72, 206,
22, 355; villi, 24 note
trade of, ancient, i, If
fran and, the portion
fraj, i, 189
Shaptr son of Urmuzd’s
expedition to, vi, 322
Arabian, Arabians, vi, 378, 388,
ix, 74, 85
Faith, vi, 95

of

Nights, i, 51 ; vi, 71, 78, 2503 |

vil, 317
provenance of, vi, 250;
vil, 3

quoted, vi, 73
Arabic, language, i, 2s

LAT 2O5u) Vile ohs

81

infrequent in Shahnama, i,

vi,
IC

versions of Pahlavi texts, vi,

255 seq.
Fables of Bidpai (Kalila and
Dimna) translated into,
vii, 382, 430
Tabari. See Tabari.
Arachosia, the district about |

Kandahar, vi, 32
Aragan (Ramkubad), town, vii,
188
Aral Sea, i, 57 note ; iii, Io
Arar tree, vi, 19
Aras (Araxes), river in Azar-
baijan, v, 13, 14
confused with the Oxus, i,
71, 37°
Arash, king of the Khuzians
q.v., iv, 146, 148

Arash, son of Kai Kubad. See
Kai Arash.
Arash, Ashkanian king, vi, 197,
210
Arash, franian chief, vi, 394
Arash, city. See Hulwan.
Arastalis (Aristotle q.v.), 160,
vA; 35
counsels Sikandar, vi, 179

sentences of, over the coffin
of Sikandar, vi, 185

Arasti, uncle of Zarduhsht (Zor- |

oaster), v, 17

 

GENERAL INDEX

Araxes (Aras q.v.), battle of, viii,
76

Arayish-i-Rtim (Hierapolis), city
in northern Syria, west
of the Euphrates and
north of Aleppo, vii, 217,
218, 254; viii, 188

taken by Nushirwan, vii,

255

Arba, river, vill, 194, 195

Archer, iv, 179

constellation, v, 86

Archery, i, 263; 297, 312, 359;
Ll elOSs 2 OO eos saa Gr
lil, 53 seq., 74, 93, 98 seq.,
179 seq., 246; iv, 38, 48,
OO, LOL) 102.104, Loy, 122,
L790 3365 Ve Lit kez,
220) 230 Segre 272u;) Was
379, 383 seq.; vii, 54,
550 OO, LLowie2 etos

Archimages, 1412, 168, 170, 176

Architect, Ruman, and Khusrau
Parwiz, vili, 401 seq.

Architecture, invention of, i,
129, 133

Archscribe, 171. See fzid Gas-
hasp and Mihran.

Ard, day, i, 88, g.v., ii, 287; iv,

252; vi, 298, 390 and
NOC Vil 2s) 1x 7Os
122

Shahnama finished on the
day of, 1, 24
Ardabil (Badan - Piruz q.v.), city
in Azarbaijan, ii, 336, 405,
iv, 147, 188; vii, 89, 163,
224 we Ville OS, OO OO,
184, 226 ;
Ardawan, Bahram, Artabanus
III or IV, the last Ash-
kanian (Parthian) king,
160, LOZ, Vi, 3, 205, 214
Seq., 254 Séq., Vill, 214, 285
Macrinus, his war and treaty
with, i, 81
effect of, on Persian coin-
age, 1, 81
= Bahram, vi, 197, 210
status of, in Persian tradi-
tion, vi, 201
GENERAL INDEX

Ardawan, daughter of 1r6z, vi,
202
marries Ardshir Papakan,
vi, 202, 229
incited by her
Bahman to poison Ard-
shir Papakan, vi, 259
condemned to death, vi,
260
saved by Ardshir Papa-
kan’s minister, vi, 260
gives birth to Shapur, vi,
261
restored to favour,
265
writes to Papak, vi, 214
summons Ardshir Papakan
to court, vi, 214
receives gifts from Ardshir
Papakan, vi, 215
highly esteems Ardshir
Papakan, vi, 215
sons of, vi, 215, 255,
note
their fate, vi, 228, 229 and
nole, 259
disgraces Ardshir Papakan,
vi, 216
Ardshir Papakan intrigues
with slave-girl of, 160, vi,
201, 217 seq.
eldest son of, made ruler of
Pars, vi, 218 and note
consults the astrologers, vi,
218
Ardshir Papakan, vainly
pursued by, vi, 221 seq.
returns to Rai, vi, 223
writes to his son about
Ardshir Papakan, vi, 223
Ardshir Papakan marches
against, vi, 227
prepares to encounter Ard-
shir Papakan, vi, 227
defeated, captured by Khar-
rad, and slain by Ardshir
Papakan, vi, 228
buried by Tabak, vi, 229
palace of, at Rai spared (?)
by Ardshir Papakan, vi,
229 and nole

vi,

267

brother |

 

203

Ardawan, secretary of, slain by
Shapur, vi, 256
Mihrak Mithrak =
Madik (?), vi, 256
Ardibihisht, ameshaspenta 4q.v.,
ili, 286, 328
month, i, 82;
g2 note
Ardshir, son of Bizhan,
goes with Zarir to Rum, iv,

V;, 105.439,

360
hails Gushtasp as Shah, iv,
362
Ardshir, son of Gushtasp, 155, Vv,
205-50
death of, foretold by Jam-
asp, Vv, 49

slain, v, 57
Ardshir, [franian hero, perhaps
the son of Bizhan, supra
tells Nastur where to find
Zarir, v, 67
takes Faramarz prisoner, v,
288

| Ardshir (Bahman q.v.), Shah, vi,

213, 271 and note
meaning of, v, 259 and note
Ardshir (Artaxerxes II), brother
of Shapur, Sasanian Shah,
163, vi, 3, 328
Shapur arranges for the suc-
cession with, vi, 360 seq.
title of, vi, 364
abdication of, vi, 364
Ardshir, high priest
Pirtiz, vii, 179 seq.
released by Khushnawaz,
vii, 180
Ardshir, high priest temp.
Nushirwan, vii, 304, 333,
337, 342
discourse of, vil, 305
questions Buzurjmihr, vii,
308
Ardshir Khurra (Khurra -i- Ard-
shir), city, (Gur or Jur,
now Firtizabad), and dis-
trict in Pars, vi, 199, 205,
206, 229 and note, 231,
241, 245; vii, 206; viii,
251, 252, 412 and nole

temp..,
Ardshir Khurra,

GENERAL

city, Ardshir
Papakan builds a Fire-
temple in, vi, 230
makes irrigation-works in,
vi, 230
meaning of, vi, 290 note

Ardshir Papakan (Artaxerxes I),

Shah and founder of the
Sasanian dynasty, 160,
MOT, Pe sly YS bbls TOY Aig, 1H) &
vi, 193, 209 note, 213 seq.,
294 Seq., 393, 397, 315,

32259325, 4O5ice avalon

185) 2l2 Vill, LOL, e2EAy

222, 205, °270,5205) 392,01

SOY ibe KO), LICKS Thier

Notes on, vi, 193 seq., 254
seq.

founds a new national
dynasty, restores Zoroas-
trianism, and collects its
scriptures, 1, 62 seq.

genealogical table of his
descendants, vi, 3

rise of, compared to that of
Cyrus the Great, vi, 194

Tabari’s account of, vi,198 |

legend of Cyrus the Great
transferred to, vi, 195
birth of, vi, 213

summoned to court by Arda- |

wan, vi, 214
equipped by Papak, vi, 214
presents gifts to Ardawan,
Valeriy
Ardawan favours, vi, 215
prowess of, in the chase, vi,
215
disgraced, vi, 216
writes to Papak, vi, 216
advised by Papak, vi, 216
intrigues with Gulnar, vi,
217 seq.

hears from Gulnar of the |

presage of the astrologers, |

vi, 219
flees with Gulnar to Pars,
vi, 220 seq.

followed by the divine Grace
in the form of a mountain-

sheep, 1, 374; Vi, 221 seq. |

 

INDEX
Ardshir Papakan, adherents flock

to, vi, 223

addresses his supporters, vi,
224

founds a city, vi, 202, 224

receives promises of help,
vi, 224

joined by Tabak, vi, 225

Tabak and, defeat Bah-
man, son of Ardawan, vi,
226

marches from Pars against
Ardawan, vi, 227

defeats and slays Ardawan,
vi, 228
as recorded in Karnamak,
vi, 202

gives the spoil to the troops,
vi, 229

spares (?) Ardawan’s palace
at Rai, vi, 229 and note

Tabak counsels, vi, 229

marriage of, with Ardawan’s
daughter, vi, 202, 229, 259

returns to Pars, vi, 229

builds Khurra-i-Ardshir, vi,
229 and note

irrigation-works of, at
Khurra-i-Ardshir, vi, 230

war of, with the Kurds, vi,
196, 230 seq.

and Haftwad,vi, 236 seq.

message sent by arrow to,
vi, 238

worsted by Haftwad and
entertained and  coun-
selled by two youths, vi,
239 seq.

slays Mihrak, vi, 241

marches to attack the Worm
vi, 241

gives instructions to Shahr-
gir, vi, 241

stratagem of, against the
Worm, vi, 242

slays the Worm and its
attendants, vi, 244

summons Shahrgir, vi, 244
and note

takes Haftwad’s stronghold,

vi, 244
GENERAL
Ardshir Papakan, defeats and |

slays Haftwad and Shah-
wi, vi, 245
carries off the spoil, vi, 245
builds a Fire-temple, vi, 245
rewards the two youths, vi,
245
invasion of Kirman by, vi,
205, 245
goes to Taisaftn, vi, 245
principles of government of,
Vi, 250, 273 seq., 286 seq.
Reign of, z6Z, vi, 254 seq.
Note on, vi, 254
length of, vi, 254
Tabari on, vi, 254
coins of, vi, 256, 257, 265
Shapur crowned by, vi, 257
cities of, vi, 257
prophecy of, vi, 257
enthroned at Baghdad, vi,
258
title of King of kings of, vi,
193, 199, 254, 258, 273
inaugural address of, vi, 258
daughter of Ardawan and,
stories of, vi, 255
plot of, with her brother
Bahman, to poison, vi,
259
discovers plot against him,
vi, 260
consults his minister, vi, 260
condemns the daughter of
Ardawan to death, vi, 260
minister of, saves daughter
of Ardawan and mutilates
himself, vi, 196, 261
Shapur, son of, born, vi, 261
hears about Shaputr from his
minister, vi, 262
recognises and acknow-
ledges Shapur, vi, 264
restores the daughter of
Ardawan to favour, vi, 265 |
rewards his minister, vi, 265 |
makes a new coinage in |
honour of his minister, vi,

 

256, 265
builds Jund-i-Shapur, vi, |
266

INDEX 205

Ardshir Papakan, harassed by

wars, consults Kaid, vi,
266

wroth at Kaid’s advice, vi,
207

seeks in vain for the daugh-
ter of Mihrak, vi, 268
referred to, vi, 270
discovers Urmuzd, vi, 271
counsels Urmuzd, vi, 280
calls and counsels Shapur,
vi, 286 seq.
Church and State, his views
on, vi, 250 seq., 286
duration of his dynasty, vi,
2525 257.6 209
death of, vi, 291
Baluchistan, his failure to
conquer, vil, 242
Nard, invention of,
buted to, vii, 382
True Cross in treasury of,
vu, 380
Ardshir, son of Shirwi,
175, LEX, AS) SEQ.
makes Pirtz general, ix, 44
entertains Piruz at feast, ix,
48
death of, ix, 49
treasury of, squandered by
Guraz, ix, 53
Aregat-aspa. See Arjasp.
Aries, constellation, i, 88, 118,
BION 335); lez On Loe
318 ; iv, 24, 147, 158, 180;
WensOy LOO} wo wnLO. 1201;
Vili, 342, 394
Ariobarzanes, the murderer of
Darius Codomanus, vi, 32
Ariobarzanes, satrap, vi, 32 and
note
Arish, legendary franian archer,
v, 62; vii, 234 and note ;
vili, 75, 219 and nole ; ix,
25
Aristobulus, Greek writer, temp.
Alexander the Great, vi,

attri-

Shah,

12
Aristotle (Arastalis g.v.), Greek
philosopher (B.C. 384-

322)
206

correspondence with,
about the succession, vi,
81, 83
silk-worm, his account of, |
vi, 204
Arjasp, Turanian hero, ii, 264 ;
iv, 26
Arjasp (Aregaf-aspa), king of

GENERAL INDEX
Aristotle, Alexander the Great’s

tutor, vi, 29 —
letter to, vi, 68

Turan, 155, 156, i, 61; |

i Ose 29/5) 11 LOON a vauOy
II séq., 20, 22, 24 seéq., 29,

Sy Séq., 89, 98, 99, 107

seéq., E16; 14, TAZ) 1590;

167, L702, £72, 0£60,2200)> |

Vil,” 330) 335; S37509s
Vili, 95, 104, 148; 1x, 104
hoard of, vil, 148
in receipt of tribute from
Gushtasp, v, 32
hears of Gushtasp’s resolve
not to pay tribute, sum-
mons, and harangues his
priests, v, 36
sends Bidirafsh and Nam-
khast to Gushtasp, v, 37,
40
receives Gushtasp’s answer
and calls out the host, v,
45
gives one wing to Kuhram,
v, 46
the other to Andariman,
v, 46
the chief command to
Gurgsar, v, 46
banner to Bidirafsh, v, 46

vanguard to Khashash, v, |

40
rear to Hushdiv, v, 46

marches against [ran, v, 46 |

defeat of, foretold by Jam-
asp, V, 52

gives one wing to Bidirafsh, |

Vino
the other to Gurgsar, v,

56
centre to Namkhast, v, 56
takes the rear himself, v, 56

 

Arjasp, gives Kuhram the com-

mand in chief, v, 56

thrice offers rewards to any
that will fight Zarir, v, 61,
62

offer of, accepted by Bidi-
tafsh, v, 62

calls for Bidirafsh to fight
Nastur, v, 69

fights with the franians, v,
71

defeat ofev,.72
proclaimed by Gushtasp,

Vv,

hears of Asfandiyar’s im-
prisonment and of Gush-
tasp’s absence in Sistan,
v, 86

Summons his chiefs, v, 86

sends Sitth as spy to [ran,
v, 86

on receiving Situh’s report
calls out the host, v, 87

sends Kuhram to attack
Balkh, v, 90

marches against Gushtasp,
Vv, 94

commands the centre, v,
95

defeats Gushtasp and _ be-
leaguers him on a moun-
tain, v, 96

Asfandiyar’s vow of, and
prayer for, vengeance on,
v, 103, 104

hears of Asfandiyar’s arrival,
v. 108

proposes to retreat, v, 108

sends away the spoil of
Balkh, v, 108

five sons of, v, 108

persuaded by Gurgsar to re-
main and fight, v, 105, 109

makes Gurgsar leader of the
host, v, 109

arrays the host, v, 109

commands the centre, v, 109

surveys the battlefield from
a height, v, 110

prepares for flight if needful,
v, II0
Arjasp, dismayed at

GENERAL

Asfandi- |

yar’s prowess, reproaches |

Gurgsar v, III

hears of Gurgsar’s capture
and flees, v, 112

entertains Asfandiyar dis-
guised as a merchant, v,
145

questions Asfandiyar, v, 146

allows Asfandiyar to enter-
tain the Turkman chiefs,
Vv, 149

prepares to attack Bishutan,
v, 151

bids Kuhram prepare for
war, Vv, I51

sends out Turkhan
troops to reconnoitre, v,
151

hears from Kuhram that As-
fandiyar has come, v, 152

bids the Turkmans march
out in force, v, 152

palace of, attacked by As-
fandiyar, v, 153

arms and encounters As-
fandiyar, v, 153, 154

beheaded by Asfandiyar, v,
154

palace of, fired and his wo-
men carried off by Asfan-
diyar, v, 154, 162,

head of, thrown from the
ramparts of the Brazen
Hold, v, 157

sons of, grieve for, v, 157

Asfandiyar takes the trea-
sure of, v, 161

Khan of Chin descended
from, vii, 334

Arjuna, one of the five Pan-

davas (Indian mythology)
iv, 138, 139

with

INDEX

207

Armenia, Roman, vii, 187

Armenian,

Armin, son of Kai Kubad.

Armenians (Irman-
ians), ili, 286; vili, 188,
189, 195, 226, 248, 282

version of the Pseudo-Cal-
listhenes, vi, 14

—like, viii, 254

=Mausil, viii, 293 and note

See

Kai Armin.

Arnawaz, sister of Jamshid, wife

.

Arnold, Mathew, his

of Zahhak and Faridin,
and mother of fraj, i, 142
married to Zahhak, i, 146
seq.
counsels Zahhak as to his
dream, i, 148
Faridtin meets, i, 162
Zabhak tries to kill, i, 167
son of, by Faridun, i, 177
““ Sohrab
and Rustum,” ii, 118

Arran, the modern Karabagh,

Arrian,

the region between the

Kur and Aras rivers, 1, 9
Greek historian (A.D.

96-180), vi, 31, 68

Anabasis of, vi, 12

Indica of, vi, 12

Caspian Gates of, vi, 32

on the stature of Porus, vi,

64

Ichthyophagi, vi, 69 seq.
Alexander and the
Amazons, vi, 72

death of Alexander, vi, 82

Arrow-shots, three famous, viii,

75
Bahram Chitibina’s, vili, 126

Arsaces, name of the founder and

other kings of the Parth-
ian (Ashkanian) dynasty,
vi, 197

Ark, 158 | Arsacid, Arsacids, dynastic title
Arman, Armenia or district in | of the above, iii, 9; vl,
Azarbaijan, vii, 263 205, 255; Vil, 156, 185,

Armani, [franian chief, ix, 74 212

Armenia (Arman, Irman 4q.v.), imperial system of, vi, 198
COuntKy, 1002) >) V1), 202, some of, escape from Ard-
203);, Vil; T53;,.224:5- vill; shir Papakan to Armenia,
93, 96, 184, 193, 202, 377 vi, 203
208

Arsacid, rivalry of, with Sasa-
nians, vill, 73
Arsalas, murderer
Codomanus, vi, 32
Arses, Shah (B.C. 338-336) vi, 29
Arslan Jazib, one of Mahmud’s
generals, i, 100
referred to, 1, 114
Artabanus III (II according to
some reckonings), Parth-
ian king (A.D. 10-40), iii,
9, 10
Artabanus, son of above, iil, 9
Artabanus, Persian captain of

the guard temp. Xerxes, |

Wa ee
Rustam and, v, 282
Artabanus III or IV (Ardawan
g.v.), Vi, 201

Artang, the house of the heresi- |

arch Mani, il, 19 and note ;
Vil, 355 and note ;

Artaxerxes Longimanus,
v, 281, 282
Bahman and, v, 282

Artaxerxes Mnemon, Shah, 1, 59 |

Artaxerxes Ochus, Shah (B.C.
359-338), vi, 18 note, 29
Nectanebus II conquered
by vi, 2
murdered, vi, 29
Artaxerxes I,
See Ardshir Papakan.
Artaxerxes II (Ardshir brother
of Shapur), Sasanian
Shah, vi, 363

Arts, invention of the. See
Gaitmart, Hushang,
Tahmuras, and Jamshid.

‘Arus, treasure, villi, 406 and

note, ix, 20

Arwand (Dijla, Tigris), 1, 392, |
vill, 90; |

404; vi, 329;
ix, 85, 92

Faridun’s crossing of the, i, |

160

Arzhang, a div and commander
of the troops of Mazan-
daran, 143; ii, 43, 44, 56
seq., 63, 64; Vv, 203

GENERAL

of Darius |

 

Vili, |
172 and note, 362 and note |
Shah, |

Sasanian Shah. |

 

INDEX

Arzhang, put in charge of Kai
Kaus and his troops when
taken prisoners, ll, 41
slain by Rustam, ii, 57
Arzhang, dungeon of, iii, 309

Arzhang, Turanian hero, 148,
shit, hoy 7/7)
challenges the franians, iii,
119

slain, iil, 120
Arzhang, Mani the heresiarch’s
house. See Artang.
Aryan, Aryans, race, ili, 10 and
note, iv, 137
race, lyn 7,
early seats of, i, 7
meaning of, 1, 7
organization of, i, 7
primitive religion of, i, 7
belief in magic of, 1, 8
division of, i, 8
India and fran conquered
by, 10
Indian, their relations with
the franians, i, 15
Arzu, daughter of Sarv and wife
of Salm, i, 188 and note
referred) to) 1), 078, Seg:
Arzu, daughter of Mahiyar the
jeweller, vii, 59, 61
referred to, vii, 55, 56, 58
sings to Bahram Gur, vii, 60
Bahram Gur woos and weds,
vil, 61 seq.
meaning of, vii, 65 note
Ascalon, city in Palestine, v, 292

| Asclepias acida, plant. See
Homa.

Asfandiyar (Spento-data, Span-
dat), mythical franian

hero, son of Shah Gush-
tasp, and the rival in
legend of Rustam, 155-
T57; 17 42,555 UW, 29:5 -V,
9 TOmie, e4eseq., 291050,
41 seqg., 45, 49, 69 seq.,
go seq., 258, 259, 261,
279, 281 seg., 289, 290,
293 5) Vine 15; 493, 755;
200, 213, 224, 242, 251,

271; viii, 95, 104 and
GENERAL INDEX 209

Asfandiyar—cont.

mole, 171, 270, 332, 395

note ; ix, 25, 26 note, 104
invulnerability of, v, 19
sisters of, 156, v, 20, 22

carried off by the Turk-

mans, v, 93, 100, I7I

rescued by, v, 153, 162
lament over, v, 252 seq.
marriage of, with Humai,
Vv, 22, 77 ?

ignored by Firdausi, v, 22

birth of, v, 32

answers, in conjunction with
Zarir and Jamasp, Ar-
jasp’s letter, v, 42

triumph of,
foretold by Jamasp, v, 52

given command of one wing,
Vv, 55

addresses. his five brothers,
v, 65

hears his father’s offer of
the crown and throne to
the avenger of Zarir, v, 66

slays Bidirafsh, v, 70

presents the head of Bidira-
fsh and the steed of Zarir
to Gushtasp, v, 71

divides the host, v, 71

attacks, with Nastur and
Nush Azar, the Turkmans,
Ve 7d

grants quarter to the Turk-
mans, v, 72

made chief ruler of fran
under Gushtasp and sent
by him to convert the
world, v, 76

rests from his labours, v, 77

makes Farshidward gover-
nor of Khurasan, v, 77

reports the success of his
administration to Gush-
tasp, v, 77

slandered by Gurazm, v, 78

recalled to court, v, 80 seq.

sons of, 157, v, 80, 81

resigns his host to Bahman,
v, 82

arraigned by Gushtasp, v, 83

VOL, Ix.

over Arjasp |

Asfandiyar, put

in bonds, v.
84

sent to Gumbadan, v, 84

solaced by Bahman and
others, v, 85

Jamasp advises
to release, v, 97

hears of arrival of Jamasp,
v, 98, 99

parley of, with Jamasp, v,
99 seq.

eight and thirty brothers
OL V.) TOL, Os s11r, 160

bids Jamasp send for black-
smiths, v, Io1

breaks his bonds himself, v,
102, 206

calls for his steed and arms,
v, 102

sets off with Jamasp, Bah-
man, and Nush Azar, v,
103

vow of, v, 103

laments over Farshidward,
v, 104

prays that he may avenge
Farshidward on Arjasp, v,
104

shrouds Farshidward, v, 105

sees and addresses the corpse
of Gurazm, v, 105

passes the Turkman trenches
and defeats the outposts,
v, 106

interview of,
tasp, v, 106

receives the promise of the
crown and undertakes to
deliver Gushtasp, v, 107

arrays and leads the host,
v, 109

attacks the Turkmans, v,
IIo

defeats Kuhram, v, I10

takes Gurgsar prisoner, v.
BOT

defeats Arjasp, v, 112, 206

grants quarter to the Turk-
mans, v, I13

distributes the
114

Gushtasp

with Gush-

spoil, v,
210 GENERAL INDEX

Asfandiyar, undertakes to rescue
his sisters from the Turk-
mans, v, II5

prepares to invade Turan,
v, II5

Seven Stages (Haft Khwan)
of, i, 295 “v.27; 118,100;
E2235, LO2 5 vill eer:
Story of, 156, v, 116 seq.
compared with Rustam’s,

Vel)

rivalry in legend between
Rustam and, v, 116

quits Balkh and goes, with
Gurgsar as guide, to
Turan, v, 120

offers the kingdom of the -

Turkmans to Gurgsar in

return for faithful service,

Vi, ZO

questions Gurgsar, v, 120
SCq-, L24, 1255) i 2Oe suit,
T3453 9. LAL

during his adventures in
the Seven Stages, leaves
Bishutan in command, v,

122, 24, FU2OrsT20, 432 |

note, 144

praised by Bishtiitan and the
NOSE, 2325 3 bess

scythed chariot made by,
v, 126

revived by Bishutan after

 

encountering the dragon, |

V3 127

song of, v, 129
amulet given to, by Zar-
duhsht, v, 130

encourages the [ranians to
persevere, v, 136

prays for deliverance from
the snow, v, 138

leaves the baggage behind,
v, 138

reproaches Gurgsar for giv-
ing false information, v,
139, 140

offers to make Gurgsar
captain of the Brazen
Hold if he will be a trusty
guide, v, 140

Asfandiyar, guided by Gurgsar

crosses ford with host,
v, 140

cursed by Gurgsar, v, I41

slays Gurgsar, v, 141

surveys the Brazen Hold, v,
142

captures, questions, and
slays two Turkmans, v,
142

Bishtitan and, consult, v,
143

stratagem of, to take the
Brazen Hold, v, 116, 143

disguised as a merchant,
interviews Arjasp, v, 145

assumes the name of Khar-
rad, v, 146

questioned by Arjasp, v, 146

trades as a merchant in the
Brazen Hold, v, 147

meets his sisters, v, 147

gives a banquet to the Turk-
man chiefs, v, 149

surprises the Brazen Hold,
Vv, 152 seq.

provides for his sisters’
safety, v, 153

attacks the palace of Arjasp,
Vinlo3

encounters Arjasp, v, 154

beheads Arjasp, v, 154

fires Arjasp’s palace, v, 154

carries off the women, v,
154

quits the Brazen Hold and
leaves Sawa in charge, v, :
154

joins Bishutan, v, 155

pursues Kuhram to the
Brazen Hold, v, 156

encounters and takes Kuh-
ram prisoner, v, 157

grants no quarter to the
Turkmans, v, 158

puts to death Andariman
and Kuhram, v, 158

announces his victory to
Gushtasp, v, 159

disposes of the spoil, vy,
1O]
GENERAL INDEX 211

Asfandiyar, carries off his sisters,

the womenfolk of Arjasp,
and others from the
Brazen Hold, v, 162

sets fire to, and dismantles,
the Brazen Hold, v, 162

sends his sons homeward by
different routes, v, 162

returns himself by the Seven
Stages, v, 162

picks up his left baggage,
ViELe2

hunts while waiting for his
sons, v, 162

rejoined by his sons, v, 163

welcome of, on his return
to fran, v, 163

banquets with Gushtasp, v, |

164
fight of, with Rustam,
Story of, 156

recited by Nadr, son of |

Harith, at Mecca, v, 166
complains to his mother of
Gushtasp’s treatment of
him, v, 167
counselled by his mother,
v, 168, 175

fate of, foretold by Jamasp, ©

v, 169

recounts his deeds before
Gushtasp, v, 170

promised the throne by
Gushtasp when he has
brought Rustam and his
kin in bonds to court, v,
173, 174

meets with an ill omen on
starting for Zabulistan, v,
177

consults with Bishutan, v,
178

sends Bahman on an em-
bassage, v, 179 seq.

message of, to Rustam, v,
179

receives Rustam’s answer
from, and is wroth with,
Bahman, v, Ig1

converses of Rustam with
Bishitan, v, 192

Asfandiyar, goes attended to

meet Rustam, v, 192

parleys with Rustam, v,
192 seq.

declines Rustam’s_ invita-
tion to visit him, v, 193

invites Rustam to a feast,
v, 195

repents of having invited
Rustam, v, 196

counselled by Bishuitan to
keep on friendly terms
with Rustam, v, 196, 217

does not summon Rustam
to the feast, v, 197

wrangles with Rustam, v.
198 seq.

does not assign Rustam his
proper seat at the feast,
v, 200

remonstrated with by Rus-
tam, v, 200

bids Bahman resign his own
seat to Rustam, v, 200

vilifies Zal and Rustam, v,
201

recounts his lineage, v, 205
his exploits, v, 205
his capture of a hill-fort,

v, 206

tries a handgrip with Rus-
tam, v, 208 S

challenges Rustam, v, 209

astonished at Rustam’s
prowess at the board, v,
210

declines Pustam’s overtures,
Vie 2 seg

calls Zabulistan
stead,’’ v, 216

parodies Rustam’s address
to royal tent-enclosure,
Va 2G

arms for fight with Rustam,
Vee23

refuses Rustam’s  sugges-
tion of a general engage-
ment, v, 224

informed by Bahman of the
slaying of Nish Azar and
Mihr-i-Nush, v, 22

“ Babble-
212

Asfandiyar, enraged with Rus-

tam, v, 228

wounds Rustam
Rakhsh, v, 229 “

jeers at Rustam. v, 229

calls upon Rustam to sur-
render, v, 230

returns to camp, laments
for Nush Azar and Mihr-i-
Nush, and sends their
corpses to Gushtasp with
a message, v, 232

converses with Bishitan of
the fight with Rustam, v,
232, 240

and

Simurgh instructs Rustam |

how to overcome, v, 237
seq.

branch of tamarisk fatal to,
v, 239 and note

summoned by Rustam to |

fight and becomes des-
pondent, v, 240
Rustam’s final effort for
peace with, v. 241 seq.
Bahman and Bishiitan hear
of the overthrow of, v, 244

address of, to Bishttan, v, |

245
Rustam bewails, v, 246
confides Bahman to Rustam,

 

 

v, 248
foretells evil for Rustam, v,
248
gives his last charge to |

Bishitan, v, 249
death of, v, 250
Rustam laments over, v, 250
corpse of, sent to Gushtasp
by Rustam, v, 251
funeral procession of, con-
ducted by Bishutan, v,

251

lamentations over, v, 252
Seq.
corpse of, displayed

Bishutan, v, 253

by

Rustam writes to Gushtasp |
to excuse himself in the |

matter of, v, 256
Xerxes and, v, 282

_ Asfandiyar-nama

GENERAL INDEX

Asfandiyar, Bahman on the ven-
geance due for, v, 283
referred to, v, 288
(Spand-dat-
nama), v, :26, 27
Ashemaogha, vii, 188
Ashi Vanguhi, the genius of
piety, iv, 137
Ashk, presumed founder of the
Ashkanian (Parthian)
dynasty, vi, 197, 210
meaning of, vi, 197
Ashkabus, Turanian hero, r48;
Ui, 183, 186, 207, 268
challenges the Iranians, iii,
179
Ruhham worsted by, iii, 179
Rustam’s fight with, iii, 109,
179 seq.
referre1 to, viii, 75
parleys with Rustam, ili, 180
slain by Rustam, iil, 187
Ashkanian, Ashkanians, race and
dynasty, i, 49; lil, 9, I1;
V) TOs 25213 ave LOO: 200)
viii, 214
duration of rule, vi, 193
times, Firdausi’s lack of
materials for, vi, 193
surviving traditions of,
transferred to other
dynasties, vi, 194
importance of, vi, 194
genealogy, vi, 197
Ashkash, franian hero, iii, 33, 34,
89, 347, 35°, 352; iv, 13,
57; ot, 65
Rustam and, go to rescue
Bizhan, ili, 334

conveys baggage toward
fran, iii, 346
Kai Khusrau’ sends, to

Kharazm, iv, 15
Shida defeated by, iv, 60, 72
troops of, recalled, iv, 145
sent with a host to Zam, iv,
L57
pillage of Makran by,
stopped by Kai I<husrau,
lv, 243
GENERAL INDEX

Ashkash, appointed governor of

Makran, iv, 244
Kai Khusrau welcomed by,

on his return from Gang- |

dizh, iv, 251
Ashtad, Iranian chief, ix, 11 seq.
chosen to visit Khusrau
Parwiz at Taisaftin, ix, 9
and IXharrad parley with
Galinush, ix, I1

visit Khusrau Parwiz, ix, |

12
report to Shirwi, ix, 27
Asia, iv, 315, v, 293, vili, 187
Minor, vi, 30; viii, 193, 194
Central, vi, 73
Asmodeus, demon, tii, 272
Asoka, Indian king (B.C. 264-
228-7), i, 15

Asp, as Persian termination, ii, 9
Assurbanipal, Assyrian king, and |

Khusrau Parwiz, reigns
of compared, viii, 193
Assyria, v, 292
Assyrians, i, 10
invasions of fran by, i, 10
Astawadh. See Haftwad.
Astivihad, demon, iv, 137
Astrolabe, i, 104, 188, 310 note ;
Wy 2ES R27 Ses lV, 059,297
Wiig gO 2 Wil, 3555 Ls. 73
Astrologer, Astrologers, Astro-
logy, 1, 104, 188, 255, 310
and note; ii, 233, 284,
409 ; lv, 27, 158, 159, 279,
284, 334, 335; Vv, 48, 168
Séqs, 2035. Vy LOS, 109,
Tidy 32.) LO5) Los, 207.
218, 227, 377; ix, 73
importance of, in Shah-
nama, i, 52 ’
consulted by Faridun, i, 194
Minuchihr i, 251, 307
Zal i, 255
Sam i, 278
Kai Kats ii, 103, 215, 217
Afrasiyab, ii, 273; iv, 158
Siyawush, ii, 282
Rustam, iii, 219
Kai Khusrau, iv, 158
Human, v, 310

 

213

Astrologer, consulted by Sikan-
dar, vi, 180
Ardawan, vi, 218

Yazdagird, son of Shapur,
vi, 375 seq., 390
Bahram Gur, vil, 144, 145
Khan of Chin, vii, 353
Talhand, vii, 408, 413, 418
Khusrau Parwiz, viii, 372
Astyages (Istuvegu), king of the
Medes (Manda q.v., B.C.
584-550)
conquered by Cyrus, i, 18 ;
vi, 194
identified by Armenian his-
torians with Zahhak, i, 72,
144
Mandane and, legend of, ii,
190
Afrasiyab and, in legend, ii,
191
Asura. See Ahura.
Atbara, tributary of the Nile, vi,
65
Athenaeus, Greek writer (2nd-3rd
centuries A.D.), iv, 316
Deipnosophistae of, ii, 1o
quoted, iv, 314
Athens, schools of, closed by
Justinian, vii, 2So
Athravans, priests of the Cult of
Fire, i; 56
Athwya. See Abtin.
Atkinson, James, on the Shah-
nama, vi, 250
Atossa, wife of Cambyses and
Darius Hystaspis, v, II
=Hutaosa, wife of Gush-
tasp (?), v, II
Atropatene (Azarbaijan q.v.), i,
9g, 61
primitive seat of Fire-wor-
ship, i, 56
sub-kingdom in
times, vi, 198
Attock, town on the Indus in
northern India, vi, 52

Parthian

| Aurand, father of Shah Luhrasp,

Vv, 205

| Aurvat-aspa (Luhrasp q.v.), iv,

BTGrs We Lt
214

Autumnal equinox, iv, 313
Kai Luhrasp crowned at, iv,
313
Avars, Caucasian tribe, viii, 194
Avasta. See Zandavasta.
Avidius Cassius, Roman general,
vi, 291 note
Awa, franian hero, iv, 149
Awaza, stronghold, 170, viii, 134,
138
Axumite, - Ethiopian,
vill, 24 note
Ayas, region, v, 61, 74, 107
Ayin Gashasp (Yazdanbakhsh),
franian noble, 171, viii,
75, 150 note, 222
Hurmuzd consults, viii, 174,
177
and the prisoner, story of,
vili, 177 seq.
marches to Hamadan, viii,
178
consults a seer, viii, 178
murdered, viii, 181
avenged by Bahram Cht-
bina, viii, 181
troops of, disperse, viii, 181
Azad Sarv, Firdausi’s authority
for the Story of Rustam
and Shaghad, v, 260 seq.
Azad Sarv, archmage and agent
of Nushirwan, v, 261, vii,
283 and note
goes to Marv, vii, 283
discovers Buzurjmihr, vii,
283
returns with Buzurjmihr to
court, vli, 283
Azada, Riman slave-girl, vi, 382
goes hunting with Bahram
Gur, vi, 382

dynasty,

tries to shame Bahram Gur |

in his markmanship, vi,
383
slain by Bahram Gur, vi,
384 and note
Azar (Azarbaijan q.v.), ii, 195
Azar, genius, iii, 287, 328
Azar (Adar), month and day, i,
$3, 260.) “Vive ann
2AA, AQT. aiken

GENERAL

 

vill, |

INDEX
Azar

Abadagan (Azarakhsh,
Azargashasp q.v.), Fire-
temple at Shiz (Takht-1-
Sulaiman) near the south-
eastern border of Azar-
baijan, not at Tabriz with
which the place has been
wrongly identified (NT,
p- 100, note), 172; Iv,
2505) NIG “GO 2245 9021;
vill, 282 ; ix, 74

importance of, i, 61

visited by Kai Khusrau,
ili, 20

Ixai Khusrau and Kai Kats
go on a pilgrimage to, iv,
258

Khatun, wife of Khan, sent
to serve at, vii, 5

Bahram Gur visits, vii, 86,

Nushirwan visits, vii, 250,
363
Azar Afruz, third son of Asfan-
diyar, v, 81
Azarakhsh (Azargashasp, Azar

Abddagan q.v.),  Fire-
temple, i, 61
importance of, i, 61
Azarbaijan (Atropatene 4.v.),

province in north-western

Persia, i, 9, 61; ii, 336;
iv, £396 7% Vje16'; vi, 198,
20315) SVALe LOO) 2r4

meaning of, i, 56
Azargashasp, spirit of the light-
ning, i, 73, 248, 309, 3495
ii, 57, 294, 345; ill, 23, 53,
72, 92, 97, 114, 194, 279,

B27 Nulv, MOA, LOO, Idi;
175, 275, 307, 360; vi,
30s. CV, 2055 79, 2325
VIM AG T22) 152, L7G
245, 256, 415

temple of (Azar Abddagan

g.v.), iv, 136, 258, 259;

Viv 80; 42:50; “3177, 0305);

vili, 68, 184, 210 and nole

visited by Kai IXhusrau,
ill, 20
GENERAL INDEX

Azargashasp, templ: of, Kai
IKXKhusrau and Kai Kats
go on a pilgrimage to,
iv, 258

referred to, iv, 264

=Gushasp q.v., vi, 212
and note
Bahram Gur visits, vii,

86, 139
high priest of, converts
Sap:nid to Zoroastrian-

ism, vii, 139
Nushirwan visits, vii, 250,
363
IXKhusrau Parwiz visits,
Vili, 283, 307, 312
Azargashasp, franian warrior,
Vili, 296

Azar Makan, father of Farrukh-
zad, viii, 408
Azarmdukht, Shah, 175, v, 294;
ix, 56, 59, 69
reproaches Kubad, ix, 7
end of, ix, 59, 60
Azarnarsi, son of Hurmuzd son
of Narsi, vi, 318
Azdites, Arab tribe, i, II
Azhi, Azi (Dahaka, Zahhak q.v.),
1 e0A2 1, OL

B

BABAK, Tribal King. See Papak.
Babak, muster-master of Nushir-
wan
bidden to enrol the host,
167, vii, 230
insists on Nushirwan’s at-
tendance for enrolment,
vli, 231
asks pardon of the Shah, vii,
232
founder of the Mogul
dynasty in India
resolutions of, as to wine-
drinking, vii, 75 note
Babblestead, nonce name given
by Asfandiyar to Zabul-
istan, v, 216
Babil (Babylon q.v.),

Babar,

160

215

Babr-i-Bayan, a surcoat of leo-
pard or tiger skin worn by
Rustam in battle, iii, 184,
186
referred to, lil, 278

Babylon (Babil, gate of the god),
city on the left bank of
the Euphrates, now repre-
sented by the modern
Hillah on the right bank,
1 CO}. eile 2oOrs viel,
31, 81, 83; vill, 194, 249 ;
ix, 65, 92

hanging gardens of, v, 293
Sikandar marches toward,
vi, 176, 178
prodigious birth at, vi, 81,
180
Sikandar sickens at, vi, 181
dies at, vi, 81, 183
Zahhak king of, ix, 65
Babylonia, ii, 80, 81
Babylonian, vi, 254
script, vi, 320
Bacchus, Saint and Martyr, viii,

188

Bactria, region between the
Hindu Kush and_ the
Oxussvie3ge, LOS

| Bactrian plains, ili, 10

camels, viii, 47; ix, 93

_ Badakshan, region south of the

Upper Oxus and east of
Balkh, famous for its
rubies, iv, 65, 192
signet-ring of, i, 300
gem of, vi, 382 and note

| Badan-Piriz (Shahram - Piruz,

Ardabil q.v.), city built
by Shah Pirtiz in Azar-
baijan, 166, vil, 160, 163

Badar, Badr, battle of, ii, 337
note, V, 106

Bad Awar, treasure viii., 406,
and note, 1x., 20.

Baeton, Greek writer, Jlemp.
Alexander the Great, vi,
12

Baghdad, city on the Tigris,
founded by the ’Ab-
basid Khalifa Al Mansur
216 GENERAL INDEX

Baghdad—cont.

as his capital in A.D. 762 |
on the site of an old Baby-

lonian city (Baghdadu), |
Os TOS haley AGM OO: mil

25s. Ave tay, 250; Veto
Vi, 254, 290, 322, 327;

vii, 83 and note ; vili, 109 |
NOt, LIZ, FTA, L935 2035

303 ;) ix, 68
Ardshir Papakan enthroned
at, vi, 258
Yazdagird quits, ix, 88
Persian settlement of, ix, 67
raided by Arabs, ix, 67
Bagiz, vi, 32
Bagoas, vi, 29
Bahar, district in Turkistan
where Siyawushgird was
built, ii, 286
Bahman (Vohu Manau), ame-
shaspenta q.v., ili, 286,
3277 Va LOL Vis OzralG
note
Yasht, Pahlavi Text, vii, 188
month and day, iv, 81 note,
Neches Vat Se have
note
Bahman (Ardshir, Artaxerxes),
son of Asfandiyar, Shah,
150, 25 7s VA2s elle
V; Si, 106) 9250254) 298,
297, 303; vi, 20 note, 34
and note, 49, 200, 213,
270 and note; viii, 270
eldest son of Asfandiyar, v,
80
Asfandiyar resigns the host
to, v, 82
hears of Asfandiyar’s im-
prisonment, v, 85
goes with others to solace
him, v, 85
accompanies Asfandiyar
from Gumbadan, v, 103
sent on an embassage, v,
179 seq.
crosses the Hirmund, v, 182
coming of, reported to Zal,
v, 182
interview of, with Zal, v, 183

 

Bahman, follows Rustam to the

hunting-ground, v, 184

tries to kill Rustam, v,
184

interview of, with Rustam,
v, 185 seq.

entertained by Rustam, v,
186

astonished at Rustam’s
appetite, v, 186

leaves Rustam, v, 190

gives Rustam’s answer to
Asfandiyar, v, 191

Asfandiyar’s wrath with, v
191

resigns his seat at the feast
to Rustam, v, 200

informs Asfandiyar of the
slaying of Nush Azar and
Mihr-i-Nush, v, 227

hears of Asfandiyar’s over-
throw, v, 244

confided to Rustam by
Asfandiyar, v, 248

Zawara warns Rustam
against, v, 250

remains with Rustam, v,
252, 256

instructed by Rustam and
profits thereby, v, 256

Gushtasp advised by Jam-
asp to write to, v, 258

Gushtasp’s letter of recall
to, v, 258

equipped by Rustam for his
journey, v, 258

welcomed and called Ard-
shir by Gushtasp, v, 259
and note

long arms of, v, 281

appointed by Gushtasp to
succeed him, v, 279

historical position of, in
Persian legend, v, 281

ascends the throne and har-
angues the chiefs on the
vengeance due for Asfan-
diyar, v, 283

invades Sistan, v, 284 seq.

sends a hostile message to
Zal, v, 285
GENERAL

Bahman, rejects Zal’s concilia-
tory overtures, v, 2560
sacks Zal’s palace, v, 286

pillages Zabulistan, v, 287 |

fights, defeats, and exe-
cutes Faramarz, v, 288

Bishtitan intercedes for Zal
with, v, 288

stops the pillage of Zabul |

and releases Zal, v, 289

quits Zabul by Bishtitan’s
advice, v, 290

passes over his son Sasan
and nominates Humai and
her issue as successors to
the throne, v, 291

death of, v, 294

referred to, v, 310

Bahman, son of Ardawan, 160,

I6I, vi, 202, 225, 227, 260

made ruler of Pars, vi, 218
and note

referred to, vi, 222

bidden by Ardawan to seek
out Ardshir Papakan, vi,
223

wounded and put to flight
by Ardshir Papakan and
Tabak, vi, 22

escapes to Hind after the
defeat of Ardawan, vi, 228

urges his sister to poison |

Ardawan, vi, 259
Bahman, [ranian magnate, temp.

Nushirwan, vii, 312; viii,

22
Bahman, castle of, in Azar-
baijan, 146, Ul, 336, 405

seq.
Bahrain, group of islands off

the Arabian shore of the
Persian Gulf, vi, 330; ix,
68
Bahram, genius, iii, 287, 328;
vii, 406 and note
day, viii, 279
fatal to Bahram Chubina,
viii, 337 and note, 339
and note
Bahram, moralist, quoted by
Firdausi, li, 186

INDEX 2r7
3ahram (Vardanes), son of
Gidarz and brother of Giv,
franian hero and Parth-
ian king, 245, 147, 148;
li, 33, 35, 38, 58, 62, 35,
1277, 198; L44, 158; 249;
257, 258, 271,°290, 318,
338, 340; iil, 13, 15, 19,
43, 46 seq., 67, 72, 95 Seéq-,
I14, LEG; 132, 200; 214,
LVAD MO; ee: GV,

232

197

takes part in the Fight of the
Seven Warriors, li, 107
seq.

goes with Siyawush against
Afrasiyab, li, 226

put in command by Siya-
wush, ii, 250, 257

interviews Farud, ili, 47 seq.

Fartid presents his mace to,
ili, 50

reports his interview with
Fartid to Tus, ili, 51

tries to save Farud, iii, 52

reproaches the franians, iii,
66

slays Kabuda, ili, 74

rescues the crown of Riv-
niz, ill, 94

loses his whip, iii, 11, 95

becomes fey, ill, 95

succours a wounded brother,
lll, 97

finds his whip, lil, 95

loses his horse, iii, 95

set oa by Turkmans, iii, 98
Ruin, iii, 99

wounds Ruin, ili, 99

interviews Piran, ii,

attacked by Tazhav,
IOL

found by Giv, ili, 102

death and burial of, iii, 104

Bahram, son of Zarasp, [ranian

hero, goes with Zarir to
Rum, iv, 360

commands the _ host
Zarir’s absence, iv, 360

hails Gushtasp as Shah, iv,
362

99
lil,

in
218

Bahram, franian warrior or king,
iv, 268

Bahram=Ardawan, vi, 197, 210

Bahram, son of Pirtiz, Tranian
warrior, temp. Bahram
Gur, vii, 85

Bahram, father of Shirwi temp. |

Nushirwan, vii, 251, 262

Bahram, son of Urmuzd, Sasan- |
(Varahran 1),

ian Shah
162, vi, 3
receives the throne from,

and is counselled by,
Urmuzd, vi, 303 seq.
mourns for Urmuzd, Vi, |
306

Reign of, vi, 307 seq.
Note on, vi, 307
appoints his successor and
dies, vi, 309
Mani and, vi, 327
Bahram, son of Bahram, Sdsan-

ian Shah (Varahran IJ), |

162, vi, 3, 308
appointed to succeed his
father, vi, 309
Reign of, vi, 310
Note on, vi, 310
story told of, vi, 310
Bahram, son of Shapur, Sdsan-
ian Shah (Varahran IV),
TOG Via sea ii
Reign of, vi, 368
Note on, vi, 368
ruler of Kirman, vi, 368
title of, vi, 313, 368
seal of, vi, 368
Tabari’s account of, vi, 368
daughter of, vi, 369

 

resigns the throne to his |

brother, vi, 369

dies, vi, 369

Bahram, son of Siyawush, 172,

Vili, 75, 163, 245

reported slain, viii, 128

returns with captive sor-
cerer, vill, 128

speech of, vili, 166

related to Bahram Chubina, |

Vili, 187
wife of viii, 187

GENERAL INDEX

Bahram, son of Siyawush, wife of,
warns Bahram Chubina,

vili, 247

pursues Khusrau_ Parwiz,
Vili, 233

besieges Khusrau Parwiz,
viii, 236

beguiled by Bandwi, viii,
236, 245

returns with Bandwi to
Bahram Chitbina, viii,

238
blamed by Bahram Chu-
bina, viii, 238
given custody of Bandwi,
viii, 238
slain by Bahram Chubina,
Vili, 247
Bahram, franian general, left in
charge of host by Khus-
rau Parwiz, viii, 296
Bahram, father, in Persian
Tabari, of Bahram Chu-
bina, vill, 77
Bahram, name of, inscribed on
cup incites Khusrau Par-

wiz to afflict Rai, viii,
365 and note
Bahram <Azarmihan, Iranian

scribe, 170

Hurmuzd attempts to
suborn, viii, 85 seq.

reveals state-secret to Hur-
muzd, viii, 88

put to death, viii, 89

Bahram Bahramiyan, Sasanian

Shah (Varahran III), 162,
vi, 3, 316, 324, 334

Reign of, vi, 313
Note on, vi, 313

miscalled ‘‘ Kirmanshah,”’
vi, 313, 368

appoints his son to succeed
him, vi, 314, 315

Bahram Chubina, son of Gas-

hasp, marchlord of Rai,
Persian warrior and usur-
per, 470-173, 1, 143° Mi,
ZOOM 250 Gea Villa Oven 735
184, 187, 199, 209, 214,
215, 343 seqg., 352 seq.,
GENERAL INDEX 219

Bahram Chibina—cont.

356 seq., 360, 383; ix, 6,
5, 16,22, OF, 105

Romance of, viii, 72 seq.,
187, 191, 304 nole; ix, 5
Noldeke on,’ viii, 73

account of, viii, 72

seller of sheep’s heads and,
vili, 74, 107

dream of, vili, 75

withholding of booty by,
viii, 76, 148

insult of Hurmuzd to, viii,
70

defeat of, in Lazic war, viii,
70

sends swords to Hurmuzd,
viii, 76

parentage of, viii, 76, 77

malicious speech about, viii,
77; 159

coinage of, viil, 77, 173

brought to notice of Hur-
muzd, viii, 98

described, viii, 98, 206

identified by Zad Farrukh,
Vili, 99

sent for by Hurmuzd, viii,
100

consulted by Hurmuzad, viii,
100

made commander-in-chief,
Vili, 102

selects his troops, viii, 102

justifies his method in so
doing, viii, 104

receives
from Hurmuzd, viii, 105
Mihran as recorder from

Hurmuzd, viii, 106

marches from Taisaftn, viii,
106

refuses to be recalled, viii,
108

marches to Khuzistan, viii,
109 and note

hay-seller and, viii, 109

Rustam’s_ banner |

marches toward Dama- |
ghan, viii, 109
parley of, with Faghfur,

Vili, I12

Bahram Chiibina, refuses Sawa’s

offers, viii,
seq.
counselled by Kharrad, viii,
we
arrays his host, vill, 122

I13 seq., 117

prayer of, before battle,
viii, 123
encourages the  frdnians

against Sawa’s sorcery,
etc., vill, 124 seq.

defeats and slays Sawa, viii,
126

doings of, after battle with
Sawa, vili, 130

rewarded by Hurmuzd, vii,

133

ordered to attack Parmuda,
Vili, 133

holds revel in a _ garden,
Vili, 135

attacked by and defeats
Parmuda, viii, 135 seq.

besieges Parmuida in Awaza,
viii, 138

informs Hurmuzd, viii, 138

negotiates for surrender of
Awaza with Parmiuda,
vill, 138 seq.

receives surrender of, and
insults, Parmuda, vill, 143

blamed by Kharrad and
archscribe, viii, 144

tries to appease Parmiuda,
Vili, 145

has inventory made of the
wealth in Awaza, viii, 147

sends [zid Gashasp with
spoil to Tran, viii, 148

Hurmuzd begins to suspect,
Vill, I51

advances of, to Khan re-
jected, viii, 153

goes to Balkh, vili, 153

guided by an onager, viii,
150

incited to seek the king-
ship, viii, 158

change in, vili, 158

questioned by Kharrad, viii,
158
GENERAL INDEX

Bahram Chubina, sends Yalan-

sina after JXharrad and
archscribe, vili, 159
pardons archscribe, vill, 160
Luck of, vili, 162
renounces’ allegiance to
Hurmuzd, vii, 162
intercepts the royal letters,
vill, 163

consults the chiefs, vili, 163 |
becomes friends with the |

Khan, viii, 172

appoints a prince for Khura- |

san, efc., viii, 173
marches to Rai, vill, 173
avenges murder of Ayin

Gashasp, vili, 181
historical campaign of,

against Khusrau Parwiz,

vu, 189
carline and, viii, 189, 303
marches to the Nahrawan,

Vili, 201
spies’ report of, to Khusrau

Parwiz, viii, 201
Khusrau Parwiz marches to

meet, viii, 203

interview of,

204 seq.
tampers with

with, viii,

troops. of

 

Khusrau Parwiz, viii, 225 |

combat of, with Khusrau
Parwiz, vili, 228

arrives at Taisafun, vili, 231

sends Bahram, son of Siya-
wush, in pursuit of Khus-
rau Parwiz, vili, 233

blames Bahram, viii, 238

chides, warns and _ im-
prisons Bandwi, viii, 238

addresses the magnates, viii,

239
elected Shah, viii, 243
gives malcontents three

days to quit fran, viii, 244 |

plot against, vill, 245 seq.

warned, viii, 247

slays Bahram, son of Siya-
wush, vili, 247

hears of Bandwi’s escape,
Vili, 248

Bahram Chiubina, deceived by

forged letters, viii, 287,
293, 294
marches against MKhusrau

Parwiz, vill, 287

goes to Azar Abadagan,
Vili, 288

arrays his host, viii, 289

fights with and slays Kut,
vill, 290

sends back corpse of Kut,
Vili, 291

worsts Rtimans, vili, 292

= Elarvestsoine Vill e292

charges and routs Khusrau
Parwiz’ centre, villi, 294

fights with Gurdwi, viii, 294

goes to fight Khusrau Par-
wiz and his body-guard,
Vili, 297

leaves Janfurtz in charge

of host, vili, 297

puts to flight and yursues
Khusrau Parwiz, viii, 298

Surtish saves Khusrau Par-
wiz from, vill, 209

deserted by his chiefs, viii,
302

retreats, vill, 302

releases Nastth, viii, 306

goes to Rai, viii, 306

welcomed by Khan, viii, 316

asks oath of Khan, viil, 317

counsels Khan to resist
Makattra, vili, 318

challenged by Makatura,
Vill, 319

fight of, with Makatura, viii,
320

Khan sends gifts to, viii, 321

asked by Khan’s wife to
avenge death of her
daughter on lion-ape, viii,
324

battle of, with lion-ape, viil,
325,

extradition of, demanded by
Khusrau Parwiz, vili, 328

urges Khan to make war
on fran, viii, 330

sets foith for fran, viii, 331
GENERAL INDEX 221

Bahram Chubina, Kharrad at- | Bahram Gir, returns’ with

Bahram Gur,

tempts to prejudice, with
Khan, viii, 333

arrives at Marv, viii, 336

fatal day of, viii, 337, 339

Kulin seeks interview with,
viii, 339
stabs, vili, 340

sister of, mourns, vili, 340

dying speech of, viii, 341

makes Yalan-sina his man-
datory, vili, 342

letter of, to Khan, viii, 343

burial of, viii, 343

name of, on cup, viii, 365
and notz

assassination of, referred to,
ix, 4

Sasanian Shah
(Varahran V), 163-165, i,
AQ eeva,. 3,250; 32531329
and note, 394 seq.; vil,
160, 164, 165, 170 and
note, 174, 178, 187, 334,
359; viii, 75, 129 and
MOLE, 2 1X20, 77

birth of, vi, 375

Yazdagird advised by mag-
nates to choose governor
for, vi, 376

put in Munzir’s charge, vi,
372, 378

goes with Munzir to Yaman, |

vi, 378

nurses of, vi, 378

education of, vi, 378 seq.

obtains his tutors’ dismissal,
vi, 380

makes choice of steeds, vi,
380
slave-girls, vi, 381

goes to the chase- with a
slave-girl, vi, 382

markmanship of, vi, 383
seq.

slays his slave-girl, vi, 384
and note

goes hunting with Nu’man
and Munzir, vi, 384

picture of, hunting, sent to
Yazdagird, vi, 385

Nu’man to Yazdagird, vi,
386

complains of Yazdagird to
Munzir, vi, 387

receives advice and his slave-
girl from Munzir, vi, 388

falls into disgrace at court,
vi, 389

asks Tainish to intercede
for him, vi, 389

released and returns to Mun-
zir, vi, 390

welcomed by Munzir, vi, 390

hears of his father’s death
and of the election of
Khusrau, vi, 395, 396

claims the kingship and is
supported by Munzir, vi,
390 seq.

interview of, with Jawanwi,
vi, 398

negotiates with the fran-
jams, vi, 40I seq.

franians produce examples
of Yazdagird’s cruelty to,
vi, 404

addresses the franians, vi,
BOF

proposes to decide the ques-
tion of the kingship by
ordeal, vi, 405

promises to rule justly, vi,
406

agrees to be the first to face
the ordeal, vi, 409

Reign of, 164, vii, 3 seq.
Note on, vii, 3 seq.
length of, vil, 3
largely legendary, vii, 3

character of, vii, 3

resembles Janies V of Scot-
land, vii, 3

accession of, vii, 7
age of, at, vi, 373
inaugural measures at,

vil, 7 seq.

holds eight days’ court, vii,
7 seq.

appoints ministers, vii, 4,
o, It
GENERAL INDEX

Bahram Gur, sends letters to

the chiefs, vii, 8
pardons his enemies, vii, 9
makes festival for three

days, vii, 9
rewards Nu’man and Mun-

Zir, vil, 10
honours Khusrau, vii, 10
remits arrears of taxes, vii,

II
restores the nobles exiled

by Yazdagird to their

honours, vil, 11

proclamations of, vii, 12, |

79, 82

persecutes the Christians,
Vi, 3733 vi 4

war of, with Rim, vii, 4

adventures of, r64, vii,’ 4,
I2 seq.

forbids wine-drinking, vu,
23

allows wine-drinking again,
vil, 25

whip of, vii, 47, 54, 63, 64

equipage of, for the chase,
vu, 48, 76

loses and finds his tughral,
vil, 49, 50

visit of, to Barzin, vii, 49 seq. |

marries Barzin’s daughters,
Vil, 53

hunting-feats of, vi, 383 |

Seq. ; Vil, 54, 55, 77, 80, 81
visits a jeweller, vii, 56 seq.

course of life of, bewailed by |

Ruzbih, vii, 56
many wives of, vil, 56
asks and obtains Arzu in
marriage, vii, 61 seq.
visit of, to Farshidward, vu,
68

forbids all plundering, vii, |

19

ear-marks and brands |

onagers, vii, 81

remits the tribute of Barktth
and Jaz, vii, 82

visits Baghdad, vii, 83

holds revel at Baghdad,
vii, 83

Bahram Gur reproaches Ruzbih

for parsimony, vii, 83

reported to be given up to
pleasure, vii, 84

reproached by his chiefs,
vii, 84

secret preparations of,
against the Khan, vii, 85

summons his chiefs, vil, 85

levies a host, vil, 86

makes Narsi viceroy, vii, 86

goes to Azar Abadagan, vii,
86, 94, 139

march of, to Marv against
the Khan, vu, 89

defeats the Khan at Kash-
mihan, vil, 4, 5, 90, 170
note

marches on Bukhara, vii,
90

defeats the Turkmans, vii,
91

grants peace to the Turk-
mans, vii, 91

boundary pillar of, vii, 92,
160, 161, 164

makes Shahra ruler of
Turan, vii, 92

goes to Istakhr, vil, 95

makes gifts of treasure, vii,
95, 96

deposits the Khan’s crown
in a Fire-temple, vii, 95

goes to Taisaflin, vil, 95

welcomed by Narsi and the
chiefs, vii, 96

remits taxes for seven years,
Vile Say,

happiness of the world
under, vil, 99

bestows Khurasan on Narsi,
vii, 99

inquires about Casar’s en-
voy, vii, 100

gives audience to Casar’s
envoy, vii, IOI

Cesar’s questions to, vii, 102

parting gifts of, to Cesar’s
envoy, vii, 106

addresses the archmages,
vVli, 106
GENERAL INDEX

Bahram Gur, wazir complains of ,

Shangul to, vii, 109

writes to Shangul, vii, 110. |

visit of, to Hind, vii, 5, 112
seq.
motive of, vii, 5
fabulous, vii, 6

bears his own letter to Hind,
Vil, 112

audience of, with Shangul,
vii, 112

entertained by Shangul, vii,
116

wrestles before Shangul, vii,

TI7

displays his markmanship |

before Shangul, vii, 118
calls himself Barzwi, vii,
121
slays monsters, vil, I21 seq.

offered a daughter and great |

advancement by Shangul,
Vil, 127

223

Bahram Gur, appointed Shan-

gul’s heir, vii, 143

parting gifts of, to Shangul,
Vii, 144

takes account of his trea-
sures, vil, 144

term of life of, foretold by
the astrologers, vii, 144

resolves to levy no more
taxes, Vil, 145

unsuccessful attempts of, to
benefit his subjects, vu,
146 seq.

Gipsies introduced into fran
by, vii, 6, 149

appoints Yazdagird his suc-
cessor, Vil, 150

death of, vii, 6, 150

Firdausi’s. reflections on,
Vii, 150, 151
mourning for, vil, I51
Bahram-Gushnasp, father, in

takes to wife one of Shan- |

gul’s daughters, vii, 128

receives an invitation from
Faghfur, vii, 129

reply of, vii, 130

tells Sapinid of his wish to
quit Hind, vii, 131

meets some franian mer-

chants and pledges them |

to secrecy, vii, 133
feigns sickness, vil, 134
escapes with Sapinid, vii,
134

reproached by Shangul, vii, |

135

makes a league with Shan-
gul, vil, 137

welcome of, on his return,

Vil, 137

addresses the nobles, vii, |
138

praised by the nobles, vii,
139

makes a new treaty with
Shangul, vii, 140

entertains Shangul
seven other kings,
140 seq.

and
vil,

Arabic Tabari, of Bahram
Chubina, viii, 77
Bahram Tal, viii, 138 and note
Baida (White), a town in Pars a
few miles north of Shiraz,
not to be confounded
with the — stronghold
known as ‘“‘ White Castle”
further north, i, 236; vi,
198 and note, 199
Baigand, city and _ fortress
(Kuhandizh ?) between
Bukhara and the Oxus,
vli, 176
Afrasiyab encamps at, iv,
I5!
marches from, iv, 154
Mahwi encamps at, ix, 118
Baisinghar Khan, grandson of
Timur the Lame, life of
Firdausi by, i, 23
edition of Shahnama of, I,
23
preface to, i, 67
Baitu’l Mukaddas (Gang-i-Diz-
hukht), Zahhak’s capital
(Babylon ?), also an Arab
name for Jerusalem, i,
161
224

Baitu’l Haram, the Kaaba 4q.v.,
Vij ebioy 120

Baj, Zoroastrian system of pray-
ing, i, 80

Bakhtagan,
mihr, vli, 279

Baku, town on the peninsula of
Apsheron -on the western
shores of the Caspian and
a chief centre of the
petroleum industry, i, 58
nate

Bakyir, mountain where Afra-
siyab had a palace, iv, 136

Balaam, prophet, v, 15

Bal’ami, Abu

al-, (died A-D. 996),

Samanid minister and

compiler of the Persian

version of Tabari’s An-

nals, vil, 5

(Balash q.v.), Sasanian

Shah, vii, 170 seq.

Balas

Balash, king of Kirman, slain by |
Ardshir Papakan, vi, 205 |

Balash (Balas), Sasanian Shah,
166, vi, 3
appointed regent by Piruz,
vii, 164

father of Buzurj- |

7Ali Muhammad |

hears of the overthrow of |

Piriz, vii, 159

Reign of, vii, 170 seq.
Note on, vii, 170

character of, vil, 171

introduces public baths, vii,
regi

end of, vil, 171

title of, vil, 171

accession of, vil, 171

Sifarai’s letter to, vli, 173 |

welcomes Sufarai on his
return from Turan, vii,
181

dethroned, vii, 182

Balkh, city in northern Afghani- —

stan, 154, 155, ii, 101, 228
231, 242, 246, 249; ill,
153, 1923 1v, 19,20, 65,
T50; L57, 255 0 To, 20;
29, 31, 33, 41, 48, 73, 86,
87, 91, 104, 171, 255;

GENERAL INDEX

Palkh—cont.
vil, 94, 331, 359, 384 ;
Vill, 22, 74, 95, 153, 159,
TOL; 174), Lx, LLO

ancient seat of Aryan civili-
zation, 1, 7

situated on ancient trade-
route, i, 57

seat of the Magi, i, 60 seq.

Zoroaster’s successful evan-
geltat., OT 5 av, 18

Zoroaster slain at, i, 61 v,
2

rhyme-word, Firdausi’s dif-
ficulty with, i, 74

Shahnama, scene of, shifted
tO Oy Ve SE 7

Siyawush defeats Garsiwaz
at, and takes, il, 22

Luhrasp makes, his capital,
Vien 7103
becomes a devotee at, v,

31
Kuhram sent by Arjasp to
attack, v, 90
stormed, v, 92, 93
Luhrasp slain at, v, 91, 93
spoil of, sent away by
Arjasp, Vv, 108
Asfandiyar quits, to invade
Turan, Ven it20
aphorist of, viii, 221
bestowed by Mahwi on his
son, 1x, 115
Baltich, Balichistan (Gedrosia,
Makran), country, 167, li,
80, 226; iii, 34; iv, 136;
vi, 12, 70; vil, 340
Ardshir Papakan’s ill suc-
cess against, vil, 242
Nushirwan conquers, vil, 242
becomes prosperous, vii, 362
Baluchis, people, vii, 241 seq.
ravages of, vii, 217, 241
chastised by Nushirwan, vii,
242
Balwi, franian noble, 172, viii,
257, Seq.
deceived by Cesar’s talis-
man, vill, 273
GENERAL

Palwi, praised by Cesar, viii, 279
receives Chach, vili, 314

Bamdat, father of Mazdak, vii, |

188

Bamiyan, city in Afghanistan, |

north of the Kuh-i-Baba
mountains and famous

for its Buddhist remains,

iv, 65

Banak, franian chief, temp. Ard- |

shir Papakan, vi, 202
Bandawa, Sindian chief, defeated
by Sikandar, vi, 175
Band-i-Kaisar, dam at Shtsh-
tar, vi, 295

Bandwi, franian noble temp.
Kubad, vil, 207
Bandwi, maternal uncle of

Khusrau Parwiz, 171-173,

Vili, 200, 202, 204 seq., 224, |

B25.) 2277) 231. 294). 245
seq., 289, 296, 298, 356,
357; 1X, 4

imprisonment of, vill, 77,
176

Gustaham and, escape and
revolt, viii, 182
referred to, viii, 189

put to death, viii, 191, 355 |

accompanies Khusrau Par-
wiz in his flight, vill, 231

turns back and murders
Hurmuzd, viii, 232

rejoins Khusrau Parwiz, viii,
233

promises to save Khusrau
Parwiz, vili, 234

disguises himself as Khus-
rau Parwiz, vili, 235

beguiles Bahram, son of
Siyawush, viii, 236, 245
imprisoned by Bahram

Chubina, vili, 238
Bandwi, Bahram Chubina hears
of escape of, vill, 248
entertained by Mausil, viii,
249

goes with Mausil to meet |

Khusrau Parwiz, viii, 282
Bahram Chubina writes to,
Vili, 285
VOL. IX.

 

INDEX 225

Landwi, causes defection of Bah-
ram Chiubina’s chiefs, viii,

302
insults of, to Niyatus, viii,
309, 310
reconciled to Niyatus, viii,
311
minister of Khusrau Parwiz,
Vili, 313
adherents of, beheaded, viii,
379
execution of, referred to, ix,
16, 104
Bani Tayy, Arab tribe, viii,
188

Banquets, the Seven, of Nushir-
wan, 168. See Nushir-
wan.

Bantgashasp, daughter of Rus-
tam and wife of Giv,
Tae!

stays with Rustam while

Giv seeks Kai Khusrau, il,
365

suitors of, ii, 383, 384

rejoins Giv, ll, 395

Bar, mountain-range in Khura-
san, v, 30

Bar, treasure, viii, 406 and note

Baraham, a Jew, 164, vii, 13

entertains Bahram Gur
scurvily, vii, 16 seq.
goods of, confiscated, vii, 20
Barbad, minstrel, 775, viii, 396
seq., 406, ix, 29 and note
supersedes Sarkash, viii, 399
visits Khusrau Parwiz in
prison, ix, 29
lament of, ix, 30

Barbar, Barbaristan, town and
country (British Somali-
land), 143, li, 82 seq,. 99,
93. 98 ; ili, 207, 269; 1v,
136, 483 vi, 114; Vi,
S27) val, Son

identification of, ii, 79
king of, ii, 83, 94, 95
taken prisoner by Guraza,
li, 97
sends embassy to Gush-
tasp, v, 75

re
226

Barda’, city in Arran q.v., now in
ruins, on the Tharthur a
tributory of the Kur, iv,
147 5 “Vii, 341 3 Vill, 190,
TOO; LSA 222 226) > xan

Afrasiyab takes refuge in a

cave near, iv, 259
Bardi. See Baida.
Barkuth, city between Istakhr

and Yazd, vii, 79, 80
tribute of, remitted by Bah-
ram Gur, vil, 82
Barmaiun (Purmaya q.0.),
brother of Faridun, i, 90, 91

Barman, son of Wisa, Turanian |

INCL Op 42 eA ee Teel
O250342)5 ier S0h20, 9030}
150, 349; iii, 79, 210; iv,
149

spies out the [ranian host, i,
346

challenges the frdnians to
single combat and slays

Kubad, i, 347
rewarded by Afrasiyab, i,
348

besieges Gazhdaham in

White Castle, i, 354

defeated and slain by Karan, |

i, 354
revival of, in legend, ii, 119
marches on fran, ii, 228
defeated by Siyawush, ii,
229

chosen to fight Ruhham, iv, |

97
slain by Ruhham, iv, 102
Barrier, Alexander’s  (Sikan-
dar’s), in the Caucasus,
160, i, 16. vi, 189, 249
legend of, vi, 78
site of, vi, 79
described, vi, 164
Barsaentes, satrap, vi, 32
murderer of Darius Codo-
manus, vi, 32
executed, vi, 32
Barsam, general of Bizhan, ix,
97, 117
marches on Marv, ix, 97, 116
Mahwi’s conduct to, ix, 117

|

 

GENERAL INDEX

Barsam, pursues and overtakes
Mahwi, ix, 118
captures Mahwi, ix, 119
Barsam, the sacred twigs, imple-
ment in Zoroastrian reli-
gious ceremonial, i, 80
Barsine (Stateira), eldest daugh-
ter of Darius Codomanus,
Vi, 33
marries Alexander the Great,
PaVvlnese
Barta, franian hero, 1571, iii, 25,
Dive AG
chosen to fight with Kuh-
Tam, iv, 97
slays Kuhram, iv, 105
Bartas, region in Turkistan, ix,
19
Barzin, sacred Fire and Fire -
temple on the RBinalud
Kuh, south west of Tits
and Mashad in Khurasan,
i Dep itl, UOWP A Val sore 2
Vili, 216
{ranians worship at, vi, 400
Barzin, Fire-temple built by
Luhrasp at Balkh, iv, 318
Barzin, franian hero, i, 365; ii,
125 e22 7 Bisel. 25> es
273
Barzin, father of Bihzad, temp.
Yazdagird son of Shapur,
vi, 395
Barzin, franian noble,
Bahram Gur, 164
visited by Bahram Gur,
vii, 49
entertains Bahram Gur, vii,
50 seq.
gives his daughters in mar-
riage to Bahram Gur, 164,
Vili, 53
Barzin, father of Rad and Dad,
temp. Bahram Gur, vii, 86
Barzin, father of Ustad, temp.
Nushirwan, vii, 251
Barzin, father of Shadan, vii,
382, 423

temp.

‘Barzin, bower of, vii, 83

Barzin, general of Nushirwan,
Vill, 17
GENERAL INDEX

Barzin, father of Kharrad, 171- |

I73, Vill, 74, 76, 190, 205
and passim, ix, 4, 9, 12,
27
Barzin, father of Jahn, viii, 391
Barzwi, nonce-name assumed by

Bahram Gur in Hind,
Vil, I2I, 134
Barzwi, physician and_ sage,
temp. Nushirwan, 169, vii,
383
goes on a mission to Hind,
vil, 424

consults a sage, vil, 427
hears of the book of Kalila
and Dimna (Fables of
Bidpai), and procures it
for Nushirwan, vii, 427, 428
translates the above into
Pahlavi, vii, 382, 428
asks boon of Nushirwan,
vli, 429
Basra (Bassora),
Shatt-el-Arab, ix, 68, 69
founded by ’Umar, ix, 67
Bastam, city near Damaghan on
the road to Nishapur, vii,

357
Bastan-nama (Khudai - nama),
Firdausi’s chief authority,

Vie2A 27 2OL | Va, 175 OA. ||

traditional origin of, i, 67
discussed, i, 68

translated into Arabic by
Ibn Mukaffa’, vi, 16, 373

modern Persian, i, 67 seq. ; |

vii, 382
Bastavairi, Bastvar (Nastur q.v.),
Ute
Batarin (Marcian), Riman

general, viii, 41, 47, 52
Baths, public, introduction of,
by Balash, vii, 171

Battle of the Twelve Rukhs, 757, |

lv, 7 Se€q., V. 29

Firdausi’'s reflections on, iv
98, 106

Eleven Rukhs, 157, iv, 88
arranged by Gudarz and
Piran, iv, 95 seq.

of the Bridge, ix, 5, 67

city on the |

 

227

Battlestead=Brazen Hold,
121
Bazanish (Valerian, q.v.), r6r
defeat of, and capture by,
Shapur son of Ardshir, vi,
294, 295
single combat of, with Gar-
shasp, vi, 297
bridge built by, at Shush-
tar, vi, 298
Bazanush (Jovian q.v.), 162, 163,
vi, 324, 326
elected Emperor, vi, 353
sues for peace, vi, 353
accepts Shapur’s terms, vi,

355
Bazh, suburb of Tus, i, 38
Bazrangi, dynasty of Tribal
kings, vi, 198
Bazur, Turanian warlock, iii, 128
uses magic against the fran-
lans, iii, 128
wounded by Ruhham, iii,129
Beas (Hyphasis), easternmost of
the rivers of the Punjab,
vi, 64

| Bedouins, i, 135, 179

desert of the, iv, 148
commanded by Zahir in Kai
Khusrau’s host, iv, 148
Bel, Babylonian god, v, 293
temple of, v, 293

‘Belisarius, Roman general (A.D.

505-565), vii, 186, 187,
ZU 21S
Berber, race in northern Africa,

vi, 73
Berbera, trading-station in the
Gulf of Aden, ii, 79
Berlin, viii, 192
Berozias, Barzwi q.v., vii, 383
Bessus, satrap, temp. Alexander
the Great, vi, 32
assumes royal _ state
Bactria, vi, 32
executed, vi, 32
Bhima, one of the five Pan-
davas, iv, 138, 139
Bhutan, Indian kingdom, bet-
ween Assam and Thibet,
vi, 81

in
228

Bibliotheca, of Diodorus, v, 293
Bid, a div, ii, 44, 54, 55, 93
slain, 11, 50, 645 ai, 925605
lv, 2906; v, 204
Bidad, city of Cannibals in the

vicinity of Sughd, iii, 244 |

seq.
meaning of, lli, 244 note

stormed by Rustam, ii, 246

Bidirafsh (Vidrafsh), Turanian

Heros) 2555) Vee 2A eS

5 525 O2 segs

goes as envoy to Gushtasp,
V, 37, 40 seq.

returns with Gushtasp’s
answer, Vv, 44

receives banner from Ar-
jasp, v, 46

commands one wing, v, 56

volunteers to fight Zarir, v,
62

slays Zarir, v, 63

fights Nastur, v, 70

slain by Asfandiyar, v, 70

head of, presented to Gush-
tasp, v, 7I

Bidpai, Indian sage, vii, 383

Fables of (Book of Kalila
and Dimna), brought to
Persia, 169, vii, 213, 382

Bih Afrid, daughter of Gush- |

CASpy Ales ee
taken captive by the Turk-
mans, v, 93, 94, I00
goes with Humai to draw

water and meets
fandiyar, v, 147
escapes from Arjasp’s

palace, v, 153
laments over Asfandiyar, v,
252
reproaches Gushtasp, v, 254
Bihafridh, ancestor of Ardshir
Papakan, vi, 200
Ardshir, Seleucia q.v.
rebuilt by Ardshir Papa-
kan, vi, 254, 291 note,
vill, 194, 196
3ihbihan, town near the left

Bih

As- |

 

as |

Birka-i-Ardshir,

GENERAL INDEX

Bihisht (Paradise), name of the
country round Gang, iv,

195
| Bihistun. See Bistitin.

Bihriz, a scribe temp. Bahram
Gur vill 77 Seg:
makes an inventory of the
goods of the  miser
Farshidward, vii, 72
Bihzad (‘‘ well bred ’’), the horse
of Siyawush and_ sub-
sequently of Kai Khus-
TAU, LsAOn ies Ou hive cl 72s

303
Siyawush’s last charge to,
i, 3u2
Farangis instructs Kai
Khusrau how to obtain,
li, 374 seq.
Bihzad, Gushtasp’s horse, v, 56,
69
Bihzad, frdnian chief, temp.

Yazdagird son of Shapur,
vi, 395; vii, 85 (?)

Bihzad, [Iranian chief, temp.
Kubad son of Piriz, vi,
207

Binalid, mountain-range, west
of Mashhad, north of
Nishapur, v, 29

Birds, Sikandar holds converse
with, 160, vi, 160

city in Pars
founded by Ardshir Papa-
kan, vi, 290 and note

Birmaya, cow, i, 151

supplies the infant Faridun
with milk, i, 151

slain by Zahhak, i, 152, 153,
162

Birthmark, characteristic
Kaian race, ii, 372;
49 and note

described, ii, 372; ili, 49

Siyawush’s, lil, 49

Kai Khusrau’s, il, 372; iii,
49 and note

Fartid’s, ili, 49

of
ili,

| Bisa (Fasa, Pasa, city south of

bank of the Tab river in |

Pars, vii, 188

Lake Bakhtigan in Pars,
vii, 89 ?)
GENERAL INDEX

Bishop or prelate q.v., iv, 341, 348
as militarist, i, 373, 378;

LV, LO 7s Vs 306'5
advises Cesar, iv, 330

Nushzad’s last requests to, |

Vili, 275
Bishtittan (Peshé-tanu), brother

of Asfandiyar, 156, 157,
v, 06, 197, 178, 1709, 182;
195, 216, 223, 244 seq.,
249 seq., 261, 288 seq.

an immortal, v, 12, 19

birth of, v, 32

commands the host during
Asfandiyar’s absence in
the Seven Stages, v, 122,
024; L20;.5020, 132,
150

host and, v, 123, 125, 131,
133

revives Asfandiyar after his
encounter with the dragon
Va, L277,

prays for deliverance from
the snow, v, 138

Asfandiyar and, consult, v,
143

sees Asfandiyar’s signal and
approaches the Brazen
Hold, v, 150

passes himself off as Asfan-
diyar, v, 143, I5I, 152

joined by Asfandiyar,
155

advises Asfandiyar, v, 179

Asfandiyar holds talk about
Rustam with, v, 192

advises Asfandiyar to main-
tain friendly relations
with Rustam, v, 196, 217

Rustam served with un-
tempered wine by, v, 211

despair of, at the situation
between Rustam
Asfandiyar, v, 218

laments for Nish Azar and
Mihr-i-Nush, v, 232

Asfandiyar talks of the
fight with Rustam to, v,
240

 

Vv,

vi, 352

144, |

Asfandiyar praised by the |

and

229

Bishutan, hears of Asfandiyar’s
overthrow and laments
for him, v, 244
Rustam bewails Asfandiyar
to, v, 246
Asfandiyar’s last charge to,
Vv, 249
heads Asfandiyar’s funeral
train, v, 251
displays the corpse of As-
fandiyar, v, 253
reproaches Gushtasp, v, 253
Jamasp, v, 254
consoles Katayun, v, 255
supports Rustam’s_ over-
tures to Gushtasp, v, 257
intended by Gushtasp to be
Bahman’s minister, v, 279
intercedes for Zal, v, 288
intercession of, accepted, v,
289 :
counsels Bahman to quit
Zabul, v, 290
Bistam (Gustaham q.v.), viii, 255
and note, 256
| Bistun (Bagistana 7.¢. “ Place of
God,’ Behistun,  BPisi-
tun), a lofty rock a few
miles east of Kirmanshah
and famous for its in-
scriptions, i, 379; ii, 128;
Lis eL2,. LOA. 950\;, ive 190);
v, 56, 184; vii, 61, 363;
Vili, 209
inscription of Darius Hys-
taspis at, 1) 65 ‘vs ©
Gotarzes at, iii, 9, 11
=Zal’s white elephant, i, 328
= Rustam, v, 229
Biwarasp (Zahhak), i, 72,
meaning of, i, 135
| Biward, Turanian hero, iii, 161
comes to aid Piran, iii, 152
Biward, frdnian chief ‘emp.
Yazdagird son of Shapur,
vl, 395
Bizhan, franian hero, son of Giv,
I47, I50-152, li, 4, 366
and nole; ii, 4, 366 and
note ; iil, 20, 45, 67, 76
séq., 81, 92, LOI, 115, 121,

 

144
GENERAL INDEX

Bizhan—cont.

ZO RS OF S37 eS Os Lael
P57 SEG 5, 2LL, 234, 024075
24S, 253; 259, 204, 275,

284 seq., 289, 330 Seq., 337
S€q., 349, 3590, 352 Seq. 5
iN 7 Sh AO Sin SOK WFP
88, QI, 102, 123 seq., 147,
292)5— vi, 104:

favourite with the poet, iv, 8 |

parentage of, ili, 324
friendship of, with Gusta-

ham the son of Gazhda- |

ham, ii, 15

relations of, with Giv, iii, 15 |
undertakes to slay Palashan, |

ili, 26
to carry off the crown

and handmaid of Ta- |

zhav, ili, 27

swears to avenge Zarasp, il,
59

borrows a_ steed
Gustaham, ili, 59
the mail of Siyawush,
iii, 60, 69

worsts Farid, iii, 62

from

praises Farid to Tus, iii, 62 |

fights with Farud, iii, 64
Palashan, ili, 70

pursues Tazhav, iil, 77

takes Ispanwi captive, ili, 78

prowess of,
standard, ii, 93

shares his steed with Gusta- |

ham, lil, 95

goes with Giv in quest of |

Bahram, iii, 102
attacks Bidad, lii, 244

goes to summon Rustam, |

ili, 245

worsted by Puladwand, iii,
258

Story of, and Manizha, 1750,
ill, 12, 285 seq.
historical basis of, ili, 11
Mohl on, ili, 285
Firdausi on, iii, 287
referred to, viii, 72

volunteers to go to the help
of the Irmanians, ili, 291

with Kawa’s

|

Bizhan,

 

 

goes to Irman with
Gurgin, ili, 292

destroys the wild boars, iii,
293

envied by Gurgin, ili, 294

steed of, 111, 296, 302, 313

interview of, with Manizha’s
nurse, ili, 297

visits Manizha, iil, 298

drugged, iii, 299

wakes in Afrasiyab’s palace,
iii, 300

holds revel with Manizha,
ili, 300

discovered by Garsiwaz, iii,
302

taken before Afrasiyab, iti,
303

sentenced to death, ili, 304

lament of, ili, 305

imprisoned, lii, 309; v, 116
searched for by Gurgin,
iO

receives Rustam’s ring, ili,
340

Rustam’s conditions of re-
lease for, ili, 345

released, ii, 346

pardons Gurgin, ili, 346

joins in attack on Afra-
slyab’s palace, ili, 347

presented to Kai Khusrau
by Rustam, ili, 354

holds converse with Kai
Khusrau, ii, 356

desires to fight Human, iv,

39
asks Giv to lend him the
mail of Siyawush, iv, 40
seeks Gudarz’ permission to
fight Human, iv, 41
receives the mail of Siya-
wush from Giv, iv, 45
parleys with Human, iv,
45
returns after the fight in
Human’s armour, iv 51,
defeats night-attack and
slays Nastihan, iv, 54
attacks with Giv Piran’s
centre, iv, 83
GENERAL INDEX

Bizhan, fights with FParshidward,

iv, 87

chosen to fight with Ruin,
lv, 97

slays Ruin, iv, 103

asks Gitdarz for help for
Gustaham, iv, 117

rescues Gustaham, iv,
seq., 132

124 |

brings back the corpses of |

Lahhak and _ Farshid-
ward, iv, 126, 132

Kai Khusrau remonstrated
with by, and other nobles,
for refusing audience, iv,
275

Kai Khusrau gives audience
to, and other nobles, iv,
283 seq.
Kai Khusrau’s gift to iv,
295

brings Luhrasp before Kai
Khusrau, iv, 300

sets out with Kai Khusrau
on his pilgrimage, iv, 306

refuses to turn back when |
bidden by Kai Khusrau, |

iv, 307
Kai Khusrau farewells and
warns, and his comrades,
iv, 308
disappears and is sought
in vain by, and his
comrades, iv, 308
end of, iv, 309
Gidarz’ grief for, iv, 310,
312
sons of, go with Zarir to
Rum, iv, 360
hail Gushtasp as Shah, iv,

362
Bizhan, Ashkanian king, vi, 197,
210
Bizhan, Khan of Turks, 176, ix,
70, 96

Mahwi writes to, ix, 96
consults his minister, 1x, 97

 

sends troops to Marv, ix, 97 |

Mahwi makes war on, ix, 115
marches against Mahwi, ix,

107

231

Bizhan, Khan of Turks, lays am-
bush for Mahwi, ix, 118
sends Barsam in pursuit of

Mahwi, ix, 118
hears of Mahwi’s capture,
ix EXO

puts Mahwi to death, ix, 120
goes mad and kills himself,
x20, er or
Black Div. See Div.
horse, Gushtasp’s, v, 18
cured by Zarduhsht, v, 18
Stone, meteorite built into
the wall of the Kaaba at
Mecca, ii, 163 and note,
vi, 65
Blest, Country of the, vi, 74, 76
Boars, wild, devastate Irman,
iil, 290
slain by Bizhan, ili, 293
Bombyx Mori. See Silk.
Book of Kings, Firdausi’s Shah-
nama, i, 43
Indication and _ Revision,
Mas’tidi’s, vi, 252
quoted, vi, 252
Boot, golden. See Golden.
Borysthenes, river (Dnieper q.v.),
lil, I9I
Boulder of the Div Akwan, iii,
271, 343 Seq., 347
Rustam carried off on, iii,
276
flung into the sea with,
iii, 278
raised from the sea, ili, 309
used to cover Bizhan’s pris-
on, ili, 309
removed from pit’s mouth
by Rustam. iii, 345
Boundary-pillar, Bahram Gur’s,
Vil, 92, 160, 161, 164
Bowl, the full, symbolism of, vi,
63
Brabantio, his warning
Othello, vi, 324
Bradré6k-résh, a Karap, v, I
slayer of Zarduhsht, v, 15
Brahman, Hindu priest, ili, 29 ;
iv, 50)s) V, 207, ‘Vil, 425);
ix, 21

to

mn
232

Brahmans (Gymnosophiste), 759 |

vi, 64
Palladius on, vi, 61
country of, vi, 143, 147

hear of Sikandar’s coming |

and write to him, vi,

143

Sikandar’s interview with,

vi, 67, 143 seq.
described, vi, 144
reply to Sikandar’s ques-
tions, vi, 144 seq.
Sikandar quits, vi, 147
Brahmanism supersedes Budd-

hism in eastern [ran, i, 16 |

Brains, human, prescribed to
Zahhak by Iblis, i, 139,
146

Bramble-grubber, 164. See
Dilafruz.

Brand-mark, iii, 291
of Kats, iii, 291
Brazen Hold, the 156, v, 116,
TI7, UNO Seg eL 5 Oe
206, 255
route to, v, 120, 135
described, v, I2I, 135, I41
Asfandiyar’s stratagem for
taking, v, 116, 143
surprised from within by
Asfandiyar, v, 152 seq.

left in charge of Sawa, v, |

154

Arjasp’s head thrown from

the ramparts of, v, 157
Asfandiyar destroys, v, 162
referred to, villi, 171

Bride, the, one of the Kai Kats’

treasures, Iv, 295

given by Kai Khusrau to |

Giv, Zal, and Rustam, iv,
295
Brides of the Treasure, Genii
that watch over secret
hoards, vi, 250 —
Bridge, Battle of the, ix, 5, 67
Browning, Robert, his poem of
“« Dhe ‘Glove, vi, 384
Bucephala, city founded by

197, |

 

Alexander the Great, vi, |

18

GENERAL INDEX

Bucephalus, horse of Alexander
the Great, vi, 18
birth of, vi, 26
a mare (Ethiopic version),
vi, 18
offered by Darius to Porus,
vi, 31
death of, vi, 18, 64
city built by Alexander in
memory of, vi, 18
Buddha, birth stories of, vii, 383
Buddhism, in eastern [ran and
Kabulistan, i, 15
superseded by Brahman-
ism, i, 16
regarded as idolatrous by
Zoroastrians, i, 16
Buddhist saints, story of two, vi,

63
Budge, Dr. E. A. Wallis, his
editions of the Syriac

and Ethiopic versions of
the Pseudo-Callisthenes,
vi, 14, 17 note
Budini, race, vi, 73
Buiti, demon, assails Zarduhsht
LOTS BVaniey
Bukhara, city on the Zarafshan
river in the province of
Sughd, li, 241; Iv, 65;
vil, 331, 348, 359, 384;
LK, (Oyen ee Sy) ke
Kurakhan sent to, iv, 154
Afrasiyab joins Kurakhan
at, iv, 186
Fire-temple built by Tur at,
iv, 225
Bahram Gur attacks, vii, 90
receives tribute from, vil,

94
| Bukhtakan. See Bakhtagan.

Bulghar (Bulgaria), vii, 406
Bull, mythological, i, 71; i,

407; vil, 245

-fish, ii, 128

Bundahish, Pahlavi text, i, 91,

Zo UL 7 wole hy LS lye 2353

236, 337 note, 338, 369;
lig eS Ole ais 26, ob nos
189

meaning of, i, 70 note
GENERAL

Bundahish, account of Creation
Wg id Dez
court-farrier to
iv, 326
refuses to employ Gushtasp,
iv, 327
Buraza, minister under Yazda-
gird son of Shapur, vii, 4
Burial-place of Rustam’s race,
the scene of the battle be-
tween Bahman and Fara-
marz, v, 287
Burjak and Burjatur, vi, 207.
See Youths, the two.
Burjasp, Turanian hero, iv, 26
commands the left wing, iv,
26
Burns, quoted, viii, 3

Burab,

Ceesar,

Burrus, Pretorian prefect temp. |

Nero, vii, 279

Burzmihr, franian warrior, vii, |

86
bears Narsi’s letter to Bah-
ram Gur, vii, 94
Burzmihr, scribe, viii, 81, 87, 313
=Buzurjmihr (?) q.v., vii,

71
Burztyala, Turanian hero, iv,
182
fights and flees from Kai
Khusrau, iv, 183

Busipas, nonce name used by
Human when parleying
with Rustam, iii, 198

Bust, city in Sistan, situated at
the junction of the Kan-
dahar and Helmund
TIVES, 1,5 252)> 1,105) 5. V;
173, 277, 287; Wi, 175;
vii, 173, 395; 1x, 89

stream of, i, 252

Buzgush, name of tribe, ii, 55 |

and nole, iil, 207
Buzurjmihr, chief counsellor of
Nushirwan in franian
tradition and famous for
his wisdom, 167-170, i,

Dee Te 2Oly: i VAL Sie) Wills, ||

3 seq., 67 seq.
associated with the Persian
Wisdom-literature, vii, 278

 

INDEX 233
Buizurjmihr, a  semi-mythical
personage, vil 280

found by Azad Sarv at Mary,

vii, 283

undertakes to _ interpret
Nushirwan’s dream vii,
283

goes with Azad Sarv to
court, vii, 283

adventure of, with a snake,
vii, 284

interprets Nushirwan’s
dream, vii, 284

rewarded and honoured by
Nushirwan, vii, 286, 289,
304, 31I, 315, 388

accomplishments of, vii, 286

discourses of, at the Seven
Banquets of Nushirwan,
vil, 287 seq.

on fate and fortune, vii, 291

on the attainment of great-
ness, vii, 291, 296

on what is worthiest, vil,
291

on sages, vii, 288, 291, 292,
294, 296 seq., 309

on fools, vii, 297, 298, 306

on conduct, vii, 288, 291
seq., 299, 309

on kings, vil, 290, 294, 295,
20Te3i2

on the wise administrator,
vii, 294

on sons, vii, 295, 303, 311.

on riches and poverty, vii,
295

questioned by Ardshir and
Yazdagird, vii, 308

on scribes, i, 27; vii, 311

on loyalty, vii, 312

discourse of, vii, 366

questioned by Nushirwan,
vii, 367 seq.

expounds the game of chess,
vii, 380, 388

invents the game of nard,
vii, 381, 389

welcomed on his return from
Hind by Nushirwan, vii,
393
GENERAL INDEX

Buzurjmihr, goes hunting with,

and is suspected of theft
by, Nushirwan, viii, 4

disgraced by Nushirwan,

Vili, 5
instructs Nushirwan’s page,
vill, 5

refuses to admit himself in |

the wrong, viii, 6 seq.
treated with increasing
rigour, vili, 7, 8
released, viii, 9
divination by, viii, 10 seq.
advises with Nushirwan,
vill, 47 seq.

instructed by Nushirwan |

to prove Hurmuzd, viii,
56 seq.
abolition of Fire-worship
foretold by, viii, 68
death of, viii, 69, 71
=Burzmihr (?), viii, 71
Mas’tidi on, viii, 71

Byzantine title, vii, 218

Cc

Casar, the dynastic title of the |

kings of the West or Rum
who were regarded as be-
ing descended from Salm,
the son of Faridtn, 154,
TOR, LOZ.) TOS) 07.) elo),
T7217 oe 2 O2 see O35
rity Coy, ily WN PXO\7/ Sie

Vil, 163)>) will, (S)Seg., 195. |

43, Seq., 51 Se€q-, 230, 232,
245, 252 Seq., 257 Seq., 299,

306 seq., 334, 373 Seq.,

AOSUSEG ne, 1S) LO; 23
transliteration of, i, 84 and
note

temp. Luhrasp, 154, iv, 339 |

SC. 5 V5 EL, 32; 107,
daughter of=Katayun, iv,
3145 Vv, 167, 205
capital of, founded by Salm,
lv, 325

 

 

Cesar, temp. Luhrasp, Nastar,

master of the herds to, iv,
325
refuses to employ Gush-
tasp, iv, 326
Burab, court-farrier to, iv,
320
refuses to employ Gush-
tasp, lv, 327
proposes to give his eldest
daughter in marriage, iv,
329
wrath of, at his daughter’s
choice of Gushtasp, iv,
330
yields to bishop’s counsel,
iv; 331
refuses to provide for his
daughter and Gushtasp,
iv, 331
bids Mirin slay the wolf of
Faskun, iv, 333 ;
inspects the slain wolf, iv,
341
marries his second daugh-
ter to Mirin, iv, 341
bids Ahran slay the dragon
of Mount Sakila, iv, 342
third daughter of, iv, 342
Seq.
married to Ahran, iv,
348
rejoices in his two sons in
law, iv, 348
proclaims the tidings of the
slaying of the wolf and
the dragon, iv, 349
sons-in-law of, display their
accomplishment on the
riding-ground, iv, 349
sees Gushtasp’s prowess and
questions him, iv, 350
learns the truth about the
wolf and the dragon and
asks pardon of Gushtasp
and Katayun, iv, 351
wrath of, with Mirin and
Ahran, iv, 351
seeks to find out through
Kataytin who Gushtasp
is, iv, 351
GENERAL INDEX

Czesar, temp. Luhrasp, receives
Gushtasp with honour at
court, iv, 352

Ilyas refuses to pay tribute
to iv, 352

receives a scornful message
from Mirin and Ahran, iv,
353

takes counsel with Gushtasp,
iv, 353

bids Gushtasp lead forth
the host, iv, 354

arrays the host, iv, 355

Gushtasp brings the dead
body of Ilyas to, iv, 355

welcomes Gushtasp after his
victory, iv, 356

consults Gushtasp about
demanding tribute from
Tran, iv, 356

sends an envoy to Luhrasp,

iv, 356

gives audience to Zarir, iv,
360

replies, to, and dismisses

Zarir, iv, 361

questions Gushtasp, iv, 361

sends Gushtasp to Zarir’s
camp, iv, 361

goes to feast with Gush-
tasp and discovers who
he is, iv, 363

gives gifts to Katayun, iv,

363
the franian chiefs, iv, 364

parts in good will from
Gushtasp, iv, 364

sends embassy to Gushtasp

on hearing of Arjasp’s de-
feat, v, 75

temp. Humai, sues to Rush-

nawad for peace, v, 307

=Failakus q.v., vi, 24, 26, 2

=Sikandar q.v., vi, 40, 42, 49

TT3 ETAg NEO eed Eee,
124, 128, 129, 142, 158,
EOL 7007440 7 On LOS

=Valerian (Bazantish 4.v.),
vi, 326

=Jovian (Bazantsh 4.v.),
vi, 353, 354

 

235

Cesar, temp. Shapur of
Ardshir, 161
pays tribute, vi, 298

temp. Shapur son of Urmuzd,

son

I62, vi, 341 seqg., 345
seq.

Shapur in disguise visits, vi,
330

entertained by, vi, 337
discovered by, vi, 337
arrested by, vi, 337
sewn up in an ass’s skin

by, vi, 338
put in charge of wife of
vi, 338
invades and ravages fran,
vi, 338
Shaptr prepares to attack,
vi, 346

overthrown by Shapur at
Taisaflin, vi, 346 seq.

Shaptr’s treatment of, vi,
349, 357

mother of, vi, 351

brother of (Yants q.v.), vi,

351
temp. Yazdagird son of Sha-
pur, vi, 389
pays tribute, vi, 389
temp. Bahram Gur, 165
embassage of, to Bahram
Gur, vii, 5, 86, I00
marches on Iran, vii, 84
propounds questions to Bah-
ram Gur, vii, 102
envoy of, questioned by the
high priest, vii, 104
temp. Nushirwan, 167, 169,
172-174, Vii, 244 seq., 269,
273
replies to Nushirwan con-
cerning Munzir, vil, 245
treasures of, taken by Nush-
irwan, vii, 255, 258
sues to Nushirwan for peace,
vii, 261
sends tribute to Nushirwan,
vil, 362
death of, vili, 43
temp. Nushirwan, Hurmuzd,
and Khusrau Parwiz, 172
236
Cesar, temp. Nushirwan, etc.,
offends Nushirwan, viii,
44 seq. :
marches against Nushir-

wan, vili, 46

attacks Hurmuzd, viii, 93

retakes cities, vill, 93

makes peace with Hurmuzd,
Vill, 95

welcomes Khusrau Parwiz,
vill, 257

offers help to Khusrau Par-
wiz, viii, 261

changes his mind, viii, 262

consults the astrologers, vill,
204

decides to help Khusrau
Parwiz, vill, 265

offers daughter to Khusrau
Parwiz, vill, 266

offers of, accepted by Khus-
rau Parwiz viii, 269, 270

talisman of, vill, 271, 275
deceives Ruman envoys,

viii, 272
mastered
vill, 274
gifts of, to Kharrad, vi, 278
writes to Khusrau Parwiz,

by Kharrad,

vili, 279

praises Ruman envoys, vii,
279

counsels Maryam, viii, 279,
280 ©

gives Niyatus charge of

Maryam, vili, 280

corpse of Kut sent to, viii,
291

Khusrau Parwiz announces
death of Bahram Chu-
bina to, vill, 345

daughter of, gives birth to
Shirwi, viii, 371

Khusrau Parwiz’ letter to,
Vill, 373

rejoicing of, at birth
Shirwi, viii, 374

embassy of, to Khusrau
Parwiz, viii, 374

gifts of, given by Khusrau
Parwiz to Shirwi, viii, 381

of

| Ceasar,

 

| Cancer,

 

GFNERAL INDEX

temp. Nushirwan, etc.,
invited to seize [ran, viii,
408
tricked by Khusrau Parwiz
and retreats, vili, 410
letter of, about the True
Cross referred to, ix, 22
Cesarean birth, of Rustam, i,
236, 321 seq.
Calanus (Sphinés),
cetic) vi; OL
Onesicritus and, vi, 61
Alexander the Great and,
vi, 61
death of, vi, 61
derivation of, vi, 61
identical with the sage sent
by Kaid to Sikandar
(see Four Wonders), vi, 62
Calendar, Zoroastrian, i, 88; iii,
286
adopted by Darius Hystas-
pis, i, 59
Callinicus. See Kaliniyus.
Callisthenes, Greek historian
temp. Alexander the Great
Vine
Romance of Alexander
fathered on, vi, 13
account of, vi, 13
Callitris quadrivalvis, the Arar
tree, vi, 19
Cambyses, father of Cyrus the
Great, ii, 190
identical with Siyawush in
legend, ii, 191
Cambyses, son of Cyrus the
Great and King of Persia
(BiGy 528-521), v, 10, 00
vi, 16
Camel, piece in chess, vii,
position of, vii, 422
move of, vii, 422
constellation, iii,
I5I, 255; Vil, 257
moon in, an evil omen, 1, 188;
iii, 255 (?)
Candace (Kandake, Kaidafa
q.u.), dynastic title of the
queens of Ethiopia, vi
U3) 672

Indian as-

22
<<

m2.
GENERAL INDEX

Candace Alexander the Great
and, vi, 65 seq.
Candahar. See Kandahar.
Cannibalism, iii, 191, 244
Canopus, star, i, 188
of Yaman, i, 266;
Wl, -207°;. Vi, 382
Cappadocia (Palawina), vi, 294
Captives, mutilation of, vi, 323,
334, 348, 357
settlement of, vi, 327, 357
Carline and Bahram Chubina,
viii, 189, 303
Carnelians, ii, 123
of Yaman, li, 123
Carrhe, defeat of Crassus at, i, 15
Carthagenians, the, vi, 30
Alexander the Great’s
legendary visit to, vi, 30
Casaubon, Isaac, vi, 13
Caspian Sea, i, 3, 4, 16, 19, 56,
57, 338; ii, 189, 336;
ALON LO2)s) LVL 6's Vv,
13
Caspian Gates, iv, 315; vi, 31,
32
Cassander (B.C. 350-297), eldest
son of Antipater and
King of Macedonia, vi, 82
Castellan, bishopas. See Bishop.
Castes, division of Aryans into,
1, 7
franians into, i, 130, 132
Castle, White. See White Castle.
of the Alans. See Alans.
Bahman. See Bahman.
Oblivion, vii, 184
Kubad son of Pirtz
confined in, vii, 184
escapes from, viii, 184
Catholicus, vill, 195
Catullus, Roman poet (B.C. 84-
54), i, 60
on Persian next of kin
marriage, i, 60
Caucasus, mountain-range run-
ning in a south-easterly
direction from the Black
Sea to the Caspian, i, 16;
LV GLO se Vly, Chi Vil, eA
27 5) Vill 72

M2203 5

 

| Chach

237

Caucasus, passes in, 1, 16; vi, 79
fortified, 1, 16, vii, 153,
187, 216, 239
Mas’tdi’s account of,
vii, 215
barrier (mythical) of Alex-
ander the Great (Sikan-
dar) in, i, 16; vi, 78, 189,
249
legend of, in the Kuran,
vi, 78
site of, vi, 79
described, vi, 164
Cave, cavern, in Mazandaran, i,
28
White Div’s, ii, 28, 55, 58

seq.
Afrasiyab’s, in Azarbaijan,
iv, 136 seq., 259 seq.
Central clime. See Clime.
(Shash, Old Tashkand,
now in ruins), city on the
right bank of the Jax-
artes west of Ferghana,
famous for its bows, li,
241, 258; iv, 19, 187, 188,
255; Vil, 167, 329, 334,
340, 343, 348, 358, 359;
Willy Old. 877 ex TLS, LO)
bow of, 1, 227 5) iil, 123, 187,
229% Ve 2Aadre vay 2354);
Vill, 125, 126, 294
government of, given to Tus
by Rustam, il, 358
thane of, one of Firdausi’s
authorities, vi, 197, 210
referred to, vi, 229 and
note
daughter of governor of,
vii, 285
intrigue of, vii, 285
executed, vii, 286
battle-axes of, ix, 118

| Chaghan, district on the right

bank of the Oxus where
that river is crossed from
Tirmid, and city further
north on the upper waters
of river of the same name,
lit, 152; 177,220 Wil, OA,
157, 359
238 GENERAL

Chaghan, ceded by Kubad to
the Haitalians, vii, 198
monarch of =Faghanish, vii,

333
Chaghwan=Chaghan (?), vi, 174
Sikandar visits, vi, 174
quits, vi, 175
Chaha, hostelry of, i, 45
Chahar Makala, Persian treatise,
iy 2S
account of Firdausi in, i, 38,

39, 45
Chahram (Jahram q.v.), city in
Pars
Chalah, vill, 193
Chalandshan.
shan.
Chalcedon, viii, 194, 195
Chalybon-Beroea (Aleppo), city
in northern Syria, vii, 218;
Vill, 41
held to ransom by Nushir-
wan, vii, 218
Champions, the Twelve, vii, 156.
See Rukhs.
Chamrosh, mythical bird, i, 235
Chanlandshan (Khalanjan,
Khanlanjan), district and
town (Firizan) near Ispa-
han on the Zayinda river
(see LEC. pp. 206; 207
and note), i, 29
Ahmad ibn Muhammad of,
patron of Firdausi, i, 2
Firdausi’s escape from
drowning at, i, 26, 29
Chao-wou =Sawa q.v., viii, 72
Characters, chief, of Shahnama,
i, 49
Characteristics, of fran, i, 3 seq.
Characteristics of a Happy Man,
Pahlavi text, vii, 279
Charam, place in fran, iii, 40, 41,
2), 1083785, 100, DLL, WZ
Charbar, place on the coast of
Baluchistan (Makran), vi,

See Chanland-

oO

Chares of Mytilene, Greek writer
and official at the court of
Alexander the Great ii
TOR Va OT

 

 

| Chess, game of, 169, Vi,

INDEX

Chare: of Mytilene, story by, of
Hystaspes and Zariadres
quoted, iv, 314

Charinda, river, ili, 10 note

Charjui (Amwi q.v.), city on the
Oxus, vii, 91 note

Charogos. See Tainush.

Chase, equipage for, vii, 48, 76;
Vili, 384

200;
vii, 14 and note, 280, 385
SEG aay a Vilienes 7

Note on, vui, 380
sent by the Raja of Hind to
Nushirwan, vii, 5, 380,
384 seq.
expounded by Buzurjmihr,
vii, 380, 388
symbolism of, vii, 381
two forms of, vii, 381, 388,
422
changes in powers of pieces
in, vii, 381
Mas’tidi on, vii, 382
invention of, Story of the,
169, Vil, 394 seq.
Chess-board, vii, 14, 385, 388
Chess-men, vii, 14, 380, 388

| Chevy Chase, ii, 82

district and
of the

(Naryn ?)
river, tributary
Jaxartes, iv, 155
monarch of, v, 110

commands the left, v, 110

=Arjasp, v, 54, 86
Turkman of,=Gurgsar,
139

Chigil

Vv,

| Chihrzad (Humai), daughter and

| Chijast

‘wife of Shah Bahman, ii,
33; v, 290 and note
meaning of, v, 290 and nole
(IKXhanjast, Urumiah),
lake in Azarbaijan, iv,
136 note
Children, sometimes brought up
un-named, i, 8, 179

| Chin, country, China, but gen-

erally in the Shahnama
equivalent to Chinese
Tartary and sometimes
to: Turan, 760, 265, 27g,
GENERAL INDEX 239

Chin, country, China—cont.
i, 207, 229, 230, 261,
$51,°372 5 11,-77, 82,
143, 154, 150, 237, 277,
286, 287, 289, 297, 305,
397, 357, 359, 383, 394;
lil, 46, 49, 103, 106 and

267,
rit,

passim.

assigned by Faridun to Tur,
i, 189

brocade of, i, 269, 233 and
passim

coasts of, vi, 173

cloth of gold from, ii, 275 ;
vi, 182, 334

dinars of, iv, 241

Faghfur of. See Faghfur.

helm of, i, 132

images of, v, 35

implements of, vi, 122

Khan of. See Khan.

King of=Afrasiyab, ii, 99 ;
iv, 165, 170, 230
=Khan, ili, 227,

vii, 87
=Arjasp, v, 36, 52, 55,

69, 86, 108
=Faghfur, vii, 131

lord of =Mahmiud, iv, 142.
= Sikandar, vi, 113 :
=Faghfur, vi, 171

mace of, lii, 129

ornaments of, li, 232;
102, 139

paper of, vi, 172

pen of, vi, 57, 99

prince of=Khan, iii, 226
=Afrasiyab, iv, 194
=Arjasp, Vv, 35
=Parmuda, viii,
=Sawa, viil, 222

rarities Of, Vi, 171,173 ; Vil,
49

robes of, ili, 329; Vili, 205,
257

Rose of=daughter of the
Khan, vii, 363 and note

sea of, 1, 113, 140, 252, 349;
li, I2, 256, 276, 285, 356,
8575 wy Msi, 2525 1v;
237, 254.3. VW, 109, 203,

228;

vi,

142

, Chin, sea of—cont.

233, 239 nole; vi,
Vil, 343; Vill, 377

shield of, lii, 125, 140, 256;
ix Io

Sikandar goes to, vi, 169

silk of, i, 157; iii, 104, 165;
Vv, 159, 295; vi, 85, 266;
vil, 73, 92, 347, 364, 418;
vili, 258, 269, 374

steel of, 111, 186

stuffs of, vi, 143, 215

ware of, vii, 78

sage of, viii, 235

sashes from, ix, I2, 53

gold thread of, ix, 82

merchantmen of, ix, 89

149 ;

| China, country, vi, 204

 

Chorene, Moses of.

silk industry of, vi, 204
Chinab (Akesines), river in the
Punjab, vi, 31, 64

Chinese, viii, 72
language, vi, 147
Chingish, Turanian hero, r49, iil,
207
volunteers to avenge Kamus,
lll, 194
challenges Rustam, iii, 194
slain by Rustam, ili, 195
Chinwi, noble of Chin, viii, 331
Chionite, people, v, 13
geographical position of, v,
13
See Moses.
Chosrau, Chosroes I (Kisra),
Sasanian Shah, vii, 212,
281. See Nishirwar,
Chosroes, king of Armenia, vi,
202
Christ) 2774, vi, 33917 vil, 207;
249, 204) 270, (2735.2 70):
ix, 24, 109
Faith of, vi, 133, 339; vii,
27 ALS AVAN 43; SLON 2772
310, 380
account of, viii, 276
father of, viii, 276
mother of, vili, 276
Cross of, vill) 377, 380; 1x,
23
laughter of, viii, 191, 380
240 GENERAL
Christian, Christians, 167, vi,
24205 Vile ek 7) 254" 27 On:

Vili, 21, 67, 195, 196, 256,
272,200, SLOms OL Galx 23)
rites of marriage, vi, 104
Faith, vi, 356
persecution of, vii, 153
Firdausi’s view of, vil, 219
wife of Nushirwan, vii, 263,
274
mother of Nushzad, vii,
263
helps Nushzad
revolt, vil, 266
laments for Nushzad,
vii, 276
support Nushzad, vii, 266,
shut gates of Karsan against
Khusrau Parwiz, viii, 252
Christianity, vi, 138
polemics against, vil, 219,

in his

270. 27
Chubin (Jubin), father, accord-
ing to Mas’tdi, of Bahram
Chubina, vili, 77
Chubina, viii, 215, 222
meaning of, vill, 98 note
Cilicia (Kaidafa), most south-
easterly province of Asia
Minor, vi, 294
Circesium, vili, 188
City of Women, 160. See Hartim.
Claudius, Roman emperor (A.D.
41-54), lli, 10
Cleophis, Indian queen, vi, 65
Alexander the Great and,
vi, 65
Climate, of [ran, i, 4, 5
Mazandaran, ii, 27
Clime, Climes, the seven, i, 40,
This, wives Its syone ally 10h
note, 372 ii; 290, 37 ;
Vi, 179, 262, 266, 273, 280,
376, 377; Vill, 395
Kai Khusrau surveys, in his
divining-cup, ili, 318
Centralia 7a, el 2o eer
Cloud, emblem of prosperity, 1,
73°50L3) Lh4Ay i 20S and.
NOG) AV, LAs eva, 6 OO

 

INDEX

Cloud, thunder-, as water-steal-
ing demon, 1, 7
of bale=Afrasiyab, ii, 13
name given by Rustam to
himself, ii, 53

| Clough, quoted, viii, 187

Cocks and hens, taught to crow
daybreak, i, 126

| Colchians, people of the south-

eastern shores of the
Euxine, vi, 72
Colic, cure of, vii, 39
Commander of the Faithful, ix,
*Umar, the first, ix, 72 and
note
Commons, king of the, vii, 3
Communists (Mazdakites, q.v.),
vii, 185
Companions of the Prophet
(Muhammad), 139
praise of, 739, 1, 106
Constantinople, vil, 316;
194
conspirator against Nushir-
wan escapes to, vil, 316
Contents, General Table of, ix,
139
Cook, chief, of Nushirwan, griev-
ance of, viii, 18
Cordwainer. See Shoemaker.
Corn-land, taxes on, vii, 215

vill,

| Corpse, 160

Cos, island in the A°gean sea, vi,
204
silk industry of, vi, 204
Cosmogony, ancient [rdnian, i,

5, 71
Firdausi’s, 102, iv, 136

| Country of the Blest. See Blest.

Courses, the Seven, of Rustam,
143, ii, 29, 44 seq.
Crassus, the triumvir (B.C. 115-

Aaa 25
defeat of, at Carrhae, 1, 15
Creation, Zoroastrian account of,
Me 5) LY
Firdausi’s account of, 1, 102
seq.
Crete, island, south of Greece,
Vi, 323 note.
GENERAL INDEX

Crete, Minos king of, legend of,
vi, 323 note
Crocodile, ili, 278
=assassin, 1, III
= Kamus, lii, 192
Cross, ‘the, 574, -vi, 351, 3523
vii, 249, 270, 276; viii, 308,
309, 374
captured by Darab, vi, 306
and note
religion of, vi, 138
Passion of, vi, 339
the true, viii, I9I, 196, 253,
377, 378, 380; ix, 4, 5,
10, 24
restoration of, ix, 7, 56
of Christ, ix, 2
Elevation of, ix, 43
Crows and Owls, story of, vii,
263 and note
Crystal, House of, ix, 25 and note
Ctesias. See Ktesias.
Ctesiphon (Taisafun q.v.), city on
the left bank of the Tigris
some 25 miles below Bagh-
dad, originally an exten-
sion of Seleucia on the
right bank of that river,
Mt OO Vin O21 9924 325.
B72.) Ville Aes LOO, TSO;
193, 194, 196; 1x, 65 seq.

taken by Shahrbaraz, ix,
43, 44
Sa’ad, ix, 67

booty found at, ix, 68
Culture-heroes. See Gaitimart,
Hiushang, Tahmuras, and
Jamshid, i, 118 seq.
Cup, divining-, of Kai Khusrau,
HY 307 ego, 323
inexhaustible, of Kaid, 159,
vi, 94, 100, 109
poisoned, proffered to Ard-
shir Papakan, vi, 259
crystal, to detect poison (?),
vii, 51
Cybele, Greek goddess, vi, 71
=Hittite Ma, vi, 71
Cymbals, of the Brides of the

Treasure, vi, 250; vii, 35
and note
VOL. Tx,

241
Cypress, of Kishmar. See Kish-
mar.

| Cyrus the Great (B.C. 558-528),

son of Cambyses and

founder of the Persian
empire

legend of, in Herodotus

identical with that of Kai
Khusrau, ii, 9, 190
in Ctesias transferred to
Ardshir Papakan, vi,
195
rise of, i, 18
compared to that of Ard-
shir Papakan, vi, 194
historical parallel with Kai
KKhusrau, v, 10

D

DaBiIstTAN, 17th century Persian

treatise, v, 28
Cypress of Kishmar, account
Of im v, 28

Dad, franian warrior, vii, 86

Dadafrid, melody, vili, 398 and
note

Daévas. See Div.

Daghwi, desert in Turkistan, ii,
LOS ish ve mL 7,

Dahaei.e., ‘“‘ foes ’’ or ‘“‘ robbers,”’
a name given by the [ran-
ians to the nomad tribes
dwelling east of the Casp-
ian and north of the
Atrak in the region now
occupied by the Yamut

Turkmans, i, 19; iil,
10
Dahaka (Azhi, Azi, Zahhak
g.v.), evil spirit, i, -7, 142,
172
Dahistan, stead or home of the
Dahae q.v. and town

between Harat and Marv,
i, 280, 344 seq., 349, 363,
1¥, OL, 72, 79;,148, 157 ;
ix, 95

Naudar beleaguered in, by
Afrasiyab, i, 353

Q
242
Dai, genius, i, 88, 89; iii, 287,
328
month or day, i, 88, 89; v,
At eevee OO an Vl eo.
AD Toe Xo 17
pay Mubriday, iy = Sormive
16

Dai Marj, place where Bahram
Gur is said to have been
drowned, vii, 6

Daitya, river, v, 13

Daizan (Tair q.v.), vi, 322

legend of, vi, 322
daughter of, legend of, vi,

Dakhma, ‘“‘ Tower of Silence,”’ i,
81 and note

Dakiki, Persian poet, 139, I54,

TH5 >. Aly Se 720Les OL nanve
KON LS is nv Ol meets
190

ACCOUNENOL 155 254 7107-00;
109; v, ‘20
Firdausi and, v, 21 seq.,
30, 87, 88

work of, compared with the
Yatkar-1-Zariran, v, 24
Seq.

Damaghan, city on the road from
Tihran to Nishapur and
the capital of the province
of Kumis, ii, 15; iv, 255;
villi, 109, 189

Daman-i-Kuh, the northern
“mountain-skirt’”’ of mod-
ern Persia, ili, 15

Damascus, chief city in Syria,
vi, 195

Nicolaus
torian,
vi, 195

Damawand, volcano nearly
20,000 feet high and the
culminating peak of the
mountain-range south of
the Caspian, i, 143, 144,
148 ; vi, 202; vili, 391

Zahhak fettered on, i, 169,
173

Arish’s arrow-shot from, v,
I2

of, Greek his-
temp. Augustus,

| Danbar.
| Dandamis.

GENERAL INDEX

Dambar, city in Kabulistan (? )
which was regarded as
Imdiant sihe2525025015 elves
278,283, 284)" “val, 300;
399, 421

Damdad, Nask, i, 70 note

Damur, Turanian hero, ii, 296,
319; iv, 156

overthrown by Siyawush,
lil, 295

advocates execution of Siya-
wush, il, 317

See Dambar.

See Mandanes.
Dang, coin, ix, 94 and note
Danishwar, the dihkan, sup-

posed compiler of the
Bastan-nama, temp. Yaz-
dagird III, i, 67, 68
Danube, river, v, II
Darius’ expedition to, v, II.

_ Dara, son of Darab, Shah (Darius

Codomanus q.v.) 158, 1,
2+ Mas eV, 2oEGD Vay

83 HSEG Es, ELS L295
TAS) OLS 2S 7s Oem Tes
13853255, 353 5 9 Vlllje220;
242, 387

first historic Shah in the
Shahnama, 1, 49

origin of name, v, 297 note

legendary son of Darab, vi,
eee

appointed by Darab
succeed him, vi, 2

Reign of, 758, vi, 29 seq.
Note on, vi, 29 seq.

historical account of, vi, 2

movements of, after his
final defeat by Alex-
ander (Sikandar), vi, 31

Sikandar’s correspondence
with the wife and daugh-
ter of, vi, 33

accession of, vi, 34

letter of, to the kings, vi,
34

pays his troops, vi, 35

ambassadors come to, vi, 35

demands tribute from
Sikandar, vi, 36

to
GENERAL INDEX 243

Dard, marches against Sikandar,

vi, 37

Sikandar’s visit to the camp
of, vi, 38

invites Sikandar to a ban-
quet, vi, 40

ambassador of, recognises
Sikandar, vi, 40

sends horsemen in pursuit
of Sikandar vi, 41

defeated by Sikandar, vi, 43

collects another army, vi,
43

defeat of vi, 44

goes to Chahram vi, 44
Istakhr vi, 44

takes counsel with his chiefs
vi, 45

collects a new host vi, 46

marches from Istakhr, vi, 46

defeat of, vi, 46

withdraws to Kirman, vi,

4

bewails himself, vi, 47

letter of, to Sikandar, vi, 49
Fur, vi, 50

marches against Sikandar,
vl, 5

abandoned by his troops
and flees, vi, 51

murdered by his ministers,
vl, 52

murderers of, arrested by
Sikandar, vi, 53

dying interview of, with
Sikandar, vi, 53

vengeance promised to, by
Sikandar, vi, 53

tells his last wishes to
Sikandar, vi, 54

bestows Rushanak upon
Sikandar, vi, 55, 86

dies, vi, 55

burial of, vi, 56

Sas4n, son of, vi, 211

kindred of, support Ard-
shir Papakan, vi, 223

Dara (Daras), city, vili, 41, 194

taken by Nushirwan, viii, 41
ceded by Khusrau Parwiz,
viii, 188

Dara Panah, viii, 189, 284

goes disguised to Khusrau
Parwiz’ camp, vili, 286

betrays Bahram Chubina,
vili, 286

returns to Bahram Chitibina,
with forged letter, viii, 287

Darab, Shah, son of Bahman

and Humai, 758, i, 42;
Uy IO) neve Zor. 292) 207;
seq.; vi, II, 34 and note,
49, 83, 84, 86, 132, 137,
172, Eso Valee205 val,
191

foundling legend of, ii, 11 ;
Vv, 293 seq.
Tabari’s version of, v,

297 note

birth of, v, 294

referred to, v, 294 seq.

exposed on the Farat, v,
295

found and adopted by a
launderer, v, 296 seq.

royal birth of, asserts itself,
v, 298

youthful escapades of, v, 298

brought up as a cavalier, v,
299

feels lack of natural affec-
tion for the launderer, v,
300

hears of his case from the
launderer’s wife, v, 300

enlists, v, 301

seen by Humai, v, 302

and the adventure of the
ruined vault, v, 303

receives gifts from Rashna-
wad, v, 304

questioned by Rashnawad,
Vv, 304

prowess of, against the
Rumans, v, 305, 306

praised and rewarded by
Rashnawad, v, 305, 306

captures the Cross, v, 306
and note

takes of the spoil one spear,
Vv, 307

returns to fran, v, 307
244
Darab, Rashnawad hears from
the launderer and his wife
of the case of, v, 308
Rashnawad writes to Humai
about, v, 308
recognised by Humai
being her son, v, 308
appears with Rashnawad
before Humai, v, 309 seq.
crowned by Humai and
accepts her excuses, v, 310
Humai proclaims the ac-
cession of, v, 311
visited by, and rewards, the
launderer and his wife,
Vases
Reign of, 758, vi, 11
Note on, vi, II seq.
father of Sikandar in Per-
sian legend, vi, 16
legendary father of Dara, vi,
17
harangues the chiefs, vi, 20
ambassadors come to, vi, 21
employs Ruman_ artificers,
vi, 21
wars with the Arabs, vi, 21
defeats and demands tribute
from Arabs, vi, 22
wars with Rum, vi, 22
defeats Failakus, vi, 23
grants terms of peace to
Failakus, vi. 24
marries the daughter
Failakus, vi, 2:
returns to Pars, vi, 2
becomes disaffected towards
his wife (Nahid), vi, 25
matries again, vi, 27
Dara is born to him, vi, 27
fails in health, vi, 27
appoints Dara to succeed
him, vi, 27
dies, vi, 28
Darab, Darabgird, city in Pars,

as

Seq.

of

TSS.) Vinee L7LOo) Ook:
Vill, 313
Darband, town and _ pass_be-

tween the Caucasus g.v.,
and the Caspian, i, 336;
Vill, 369 note

GENERAL

INDEX

Darband,
i, 16
fortification of, i, 16, 17

and note, vii, 213, 239
Mas’udi’s accounts of,
Vil, 215
Dari, vii, 430 and note

Pass of, described,

| Dariel, Pass of, in the Caucasus,

 

vi, 79
Darius, Hystaspis, Shah, i, 9, 65 ;
Vie DOs pew per)

trilingual inscription of, at
Bihistun, i, 6

Zoroastrian calendar adopt-
ed by, i, 59

reign of, and Gushtasp’s
compared, v, Il

conversion of, v, II

Darius, Codomanus (Dara q.v.)

Shah, i, 49; vi, 16, 17, 29
defeated at Issus, vi, 30
Alexander escapes from the

banquet of, vi, 30
defeated at Gaugamela, vi,

31
asks that his family may be

restored to him, vi, 31
writes to Porus, vi, 31
historical account of the

death of, vi, 31
daughter of, marries Alex-

ander, vi, 33
corpse of, sent to Pars, vi,

33
assassins of, punished, vi, 33

Dareja, river in Azarbaijan, v,

14

Darkness, Land of.
House of; 1x, 7;

Darman, viii, 202

Darmesteter, Professor, on J['ir-

dausi’s geography, ii, 79,

80
on Afrasiyab’s capture by

Hum, iv, 136

Story of the Worm, vi, 203

Haftwad, vi, 206

Darin, Zoroastrian religious rite,

v, 19

Daryai Rud, river in Azarbaijan,
Vv, 14

See Gloom.
GENERAL INDEX

Dastagird, city, vili, 193, 196;
1,97
taken by Heraclius, vili, 194
Dashma, [ranian hero, iv, 148
Dastan (Zal qg.v.), 1, 84, 248, 264
Dastan-i-Sam (Zal q.v.), 1, 84
Dastan-i-Zand (Zal q.v.), i, 245
and note, 248
Date-palm, i, 4
taxes on, vii, 215, 225
Daughter of Kaid. See Kaid,
Four Wonders of.
Daulat Shah, author of “‘ Lives
of the Poets,” i, 2
Death, early, Firdausi’s justifi-
cation of, li, 119
Dead Sea, viii, 192
Deinon. See Dinon.
Deipnosophiste, of Athenezus, ii,
10
quoted, iv, 314
Derketo, goddess, v, 292
legend of, v, 292
Destiny, Muhammadan and Zor-
oastrian conceptions of, 1,
52
Déwasarm, king of Hind, vii, 381
sends the game of chess to
Nushirwan, vii, 380
Dharma, Indian god of righteous-
ness, iv, 138
follows in the form of a dog
the Pandavas in their pil-
grimage, iv, 139

Dhoulkarnain. See Zu-’l-kar-
nain,
Dhu Kar, battle of, viii, 188, ix,
4, 5, 66
historical account of, viil,
190

date of, vili, 191
Diagram to illustrate reign of
Gushtasp, v, 27
Persian Romance of Alex-
ander the Great, vi, 84
Diba-i-Khusraui, treasure, viii,
406 and note
Dice, vii, 381
used in the game of nard,
vii, 381, 389
symbolism of, vii, 381, 382

 

| Dilamite,

245

Dihkan, Persian generic title, i,
56, 81
Faith of, vi, 95
Dijla (Arwand, Tigris q.v.), river,
i, 160
Iaridtin’s crossing of, i, 160
Dilafriz, franian hero, iv, 147
Dilafruiz, a bramble-grubber,
Bahram Gur and, vii,
seq.
Dilafraz-i-Farruk)pai,  franian
slave-girl, 162, vi, 3
slave to Czesar’s wife,
338
pities Shapur, vi, 339
discovers who Shapur is, vi,
339
frees Shapur from the ass’s
skin, vi, 340 ‘
escapes with Shapur from
Rum, vi, 340 seq.
entertained by a gardener,
Vi, 342
praised by Shapur, vi, 346
named and honoured by
Shaptr, vi, 356
meaning of, vi, 3560 note
Dilam, Dilaman, district on the
Caspian now represented
by Talish and part of
Gilan, vi, 202, 227; vil,
243, 244, 362
Dilamids (Buyids), dynasty rul-
ing in south-western fran
in the roth century A.D.,
Ie ANAS
"Ali the, friend and
helper of Firdausi, i, 35;
x ToT
Dilanjam, Cesar’s (temp. Luh-
rasp) second daughter, iv,
333
asked in marriage by Mirin,
iv, 333
married to Mirin, iv, 341
Dilarai, wife to Dara and mother
of Rushanak, 158, 159, Vi,
87 seq.
visited by Nahid, vi, 89
Dimna, Kalila and, 169.
Fables of Bidpai.

7O

vl,

See
246
Dina-i Mainog-i Khirad, Pahlavi
text, 1i, 189
quoted, vil, 279

Dinar, gold coin, i, 81, 231, 363
and passim
Dinawari, Arabic historian

(ninth century), vi, 16,
64, 80, 81, 256, 323; vii,
6, 156, 186, 214

Dinkard, Pahlavi text, i, 70 note,
3735 Sit. 120) se Ole evils
252

Diodorus, Greek historian, temp.
Julius Cesar and Augus-
tus, v, 293

Bibliotheca of, v, 293

Diognetus, Greek writer, temp.
Alexander the Great, vi,
12

Dionysus, Greek god, vi, 71

temple of, visited by Si-

kandar, vi, 71

Diram. See Drachm.

Dirazdast (Longimanus), title,
v, 281; vi, 324 and note

Div, divs (Daévas), demons or
“ foreign devils,” 140, 143,

T5O. iA» (62) eLCO eisai.
IQA, LAO. 2272 OO) ally
27, 33, 34, 38, 41 seq., 57
Seq.) 168) 725— LOL, 7 -1O2)
144 >) As 70574 200). 232)
244, 255, 257 Seq., 201,

208; 27973) SCGs;, 320, 830);
iv, 86, 87, 177, 288, 296,
V; 32, 50,,00) 7h, 108.0745

2ONs 2 O20 2B eo 2ONE 230;
245; Vi, 135, 140,)150,
2 ATe Sel Mens 5 Aen ae
368 seq. ; vill, 159, 161,
200; 200) 20 L, e217, 206,
290, 341, 342, 399 and

note, 418; ix, 18, 25

rebel against Tahmuras, i,
127

overthrown by Tahmuras, 1,
127

teach Tahmuras the art of
writing, i, 127

build edifices for Jamshid, i,
133

GENERAL

INDEX

| Div, divs, carry Jamshid on his

|

throne up to the sky, 1, 133
title of honour, li, 2
song of a, 1, 31
Arjasp informed by a, of
Gushtasp’s resolve not to
pay tribute, v, 36
Mazdak’s five, vii, 205
Buzurjmihr’s ten, vii, 368
Akwan. See Akwan.
=Ahriman, 139, i, 82, 126,
156, 195, 260; li, 46, 324,
342, 3705 3805-400: 7c,
189, 293, 333; iv, 63, 84,
201, 200, 278, 282, 2806,
289 seq., 301, 322, 341;
Vii Shp OL, pLOOnEOO Og,
LOA GSCGs, «2ZLO M2205 24205
vi, 349; Vii, 93, 107, 109,
TL7s) 4S ek 5452000227
268, 289, 303, 304, 323,
332, 368 seq., 376, 390;
Vill. 275 OOP eles 2b Se
222, 304 s4l, 2340, 41d,
1X, 47, 102, 104
=Bahram Chiubina,
153, 219, 293, 298
—witch, vili, I61
=Zahhak, vili, 242
=Kultn, viii, 342
Binder of the=Tahmuras,
1, 42, 125051205204:
=Gudarz, iv, 35
= Rustam, sill, 253, 262
Black, son of Ahriman, 739,
1, C2, ELG sulle53 envi) LOOK:
vili, 171
White, 743, 1, 82; ii, 27, 39
Seq., 43, 44, 54, 55, 58 seq.,
66, 93, 163, 373; ill, 143,
250, 3455) bv DSO, 42900);
Vi) LL 797031 203;) 207, 234.
defeats Kaus, ii, 40
blood of, cures blindness,
Lie oon OD
slain by Rustam, ii, 60
Divining-cup. See Cup.

viii,

| Dneiper (Borysthenes), river in

southern European Rus-
sia, flowing into the Black
Sea, iii, 191
GENERAL INDEX

Don (Tanais), river in southern
European Russia, flowing
into the Sea of Azov, iv,
315 note, 316

Doni, The Morall Philosophie of,

vii, 383

Drachm (diram), silver coin, i,
8I

Dragon, 143, 154, 156, 160, 164,
TOS AZ) E23 ecViy wk ae:
140

Faridtin takes the form of,

i, 186

of the Kashaf, i, 235
Sam and the, i, 296 seq.,
Vv, 202
slain by Rustam
Rakhsh, ii, 48 seq.
of Mount Sakila, iv, 342 seq.
Gushtasp and, iv, 343 seq.
teeth of, produced by
Hishwi to Cesar, iv, 351
referred to, iv, 358
Sikandar’s adventure with,
Vi; 71, 151
slain by Bahram
2-123) Seq.
described, i, 123,
Bao s V; 202%
vii, 43, 123
Dragon=Afrasiyab, iii, 22, 46,
2, 2LO) 2225 248. 310)
343; 1v, 270
=Ahriman, i, 195; iii, 330
=Ardawan, vi, 222
—— it Vis ES
=Giv, iii, 58
=Human, iv, 43, 52
=Palashan, ili, 26
=Putladwand, iii, 264
=Rakhsh’s dam, i, 379
=Rakhsh, i, 380
=Rustam, ili, 222
=Zahhak, i, 155, 158, 161,
163, 168, 169, 275, 288,
292
Dragon’s child =Riudaba, i, 304
Drangiana (Sistan), province in
eastern fran, i, 4; vi, 32
Dream, dreams, veridical, i, 51
Firdausi on, vii, 281

and

Gur, vii,

iv,
TS

296 ;
vi,

 

247
Drean, Abul Kasim of Gurgan’s,
lili, 190
Afrasiyab’s, i, 232 seq.
referred to, ll, 243, 297;
iv, 170, 267

Firdausi’s, of Mahmud, 1, 112
Dakiki, v, 23, 30

Gidarz’s, li, 363, 404

Gushtasp’s, v, 19

Kaid’s, v, 62, 91

Katayun’s, iv, 316, 329, 330

Nushirwan’s, vii, 282 seq.;
ix, 92

Odatis’, iv, 315

Papak’s, vi, 200, 212

Piran’s, ii, 325

Sam’s, i, 243, 244

Siyawush’s, ii, 309

Tus’, iii, 149

Zariadres’, iv, 315

Draupadi, joint wife of the five

Pandavas, iv, 138 and
note, 139

Drought and famine in fran, i,

Jee a0 Ss 7s) A 303
vii, 159, 162

Piriz’s measures to allev-
late, vii, 159, 162

breaking up of, described,
vii, 163

Mazdak’s parable concern-
ing, vli, 201

| Drvaspa, genius of cattle, iv, 137
| Dualism, i, 5, 49, 50, 52, 56, 58

taught by Urmuzd to Zar-
duhsht, v, 16

Dughdhéva, v, 14, 15

| Dukhtnitsh.

account of, v, 14
Duk, plain, viii, 282, 284
mountain, viii, 289
See Nusha.
Dunbar. See Dambar.
Duncker, Professor, 11, 9
on date of Zandavasta, ii, 9
Durasr6b6, a Karap q.v., v, 15
Dust, prevalence of, in fran, i, 3
as a metaphor, i, 73 and
passim
Dynasty, dynasties, franian, i, 49
Pishdadian q.v.
Kaianian q.v.
248

Dynasty, Ashkanian q.v.
Sasanian q.v.

E

EciipseE of sun, total,
Pirtiz, vii, 159
Edessa, S. James of, i, 374
Eggs, golden, as tribute, vi, 24,

36, 160, 169
Egypt (Misr, q.v.), ii, 80; vi, 12,
TOL 772 OL Oe amelie
187, 193
Pseudo-Callisthenes written
in, vi) 03
invaded by Alexander the
Great, vi, 30
Egyptian Egyptians,
viii, 193 ; ix, I10
falsification of history by,
vi, 16
thorn, viii, 210
linen, ix, 110
Ekbatana (Hamadan), the capi-
tall “of Medias i, 417 5) “0;
LOL. vig iesz
capital of the Manda, g.v.,
Thy 189/

(Susiana, Khiuzistan),
ancient kingdom and Per-
sian province at the head
of the Persian Gulf, i, 9;
vi, 194, 198
Elburz. See Alburz.

Elements, the four, i, 102, 286
Elephant, elephants, i, 112 and
passim
towers on, lv, 179
Ens) avin ano,
Sikandar’s device to over-
come, vi, II5, 116
=Rustam, iii, 221, 253
= Rakhsh, ili, 257
=F ur, vi, 117
piece in chess,
423
position of, vii, 388, 422
move of, vii, 422
White, Zal’s, r4z, i, 328
referred to, i, 377

temp.

Vin LOR

Elam

Vile Oy,

GENERAL

INDEX
Elephantine, the=Rustam, ii,
65, 67
Eleven Rukhs, Battle of the, iv,
88

arranged by Gudarz
Piran, iv, 95 seq.
Firdausi’s reflections on, iv,
7, 98, 106
Ellipi, kingdom of, 1, 9, 17
Elixir, 744, 1, 177, 178
| Elymais (Elam, q.v.), kingdom,
vi, 198
Endless peace, the, vii, 217
| Enétokoitai, the. vi, 80
Epirus, ancient kingdom in
| northern Greece, vi, I2
Alexander I of, vi, 12
his expedition to Italy,
vi, I2
Equinox, autumnal, iv, 313
Erinde, river, ili, 10 and uote, II
Esdras (Ezra), Jewish priest and
scribe, supposed by the
Muhammadans to have
restored from memory the
law lost during the cap-
tivity, vii, 207, 264
Ether, vili, 275
Ethics, Muhammadan, respected,
vill, 7
| Ethiop, Ethiopian, Ethiopic, j,
| 44.9 i 226) Vi, ABs
80
=Indian, vi, 13, 68
western and eastern, vi, 13,

and

68, 71
version of the Pseudo-Callis-
thenes, q.v., vi, 17 and

note, 18, 30, 33, 66, 67,
71, 74, 82, 83
| Ethiopia, vi, 72
flight of Nectanebus to, vi,
18 note
western and eastern, vi, 68
=India, vi, 68
| Eumenes, Greek
temp. Alexander
Great, vi, 12
Euphrates (Farat, q.v.), river, ii,
80s iv, 292); vi; 31, 32702
vii, 217; viii, 188, 190

ephemerist,
the
GENERAL

Euxine, sea, i, 16; ii, 191, 336;

vi, 72
Eye, metaphor for child, i, 178,
180, 181, 185; 194; Ul,
297> 3283. Vv, 272 >- vu,
276, 356
evil; 115 204, 252 +1, T41,
157, 337; iv, 144, 282;
Vv, 194, 245, 251, 290;

vi, 266, 402; vii, 78, 81,
172; viii, 16, 417

turns milk to bane, vii, 320
S€q., 324, 325

F

FABLES oF Brppart (Book of
Kalila and Dimna), vii,
213, 427 Seq.; Vili, 202
note, 390
introduction of, into Persia,
vil, 213
translation of, vii, 382, 383
Firdausi’s account of, vii,
430
vogue of, vii, 383
origin of, vii, 383
Nushirwan’s acquisition of,
vii, 423 seq.
Faghanish, temp. Piraz, king of
the Haitalians, 168, vii,
157
helps Piruz for a considera-
tion, vii, 157
temp. Nushirwan, 168

made king instead of
Ghatkar, vii, 333
Nushirwan takes counsel

about, vul, 333

descent of, from Bahram
Gur, vii, 334

Nushirwan writes to,
337

makes submission to Niish-
irwan, vii, 360

Faghfur, dynastic title of the

rulers of Chin and Machin,
TA2: 5s. OO A, 20275
it, (353°; 1N Lh, bs 5, 200;
238 SAG: = V, 224 5 “Vi, 35;

vil,

INDEX 249

Faghftir—cont,
SO, 113) 160) -seg., 325.5
vil, 340, 343, 408; vill,

FAL ARIS, 97; 102
temp. Wai Khusrau, helps
Afrasiyab, iv, 219
Khan and, sue to Kai
Khusrau for peace, iv,
229

orders Afrasiyab to quit

Khutan and Chin, iv,
230
grants facilities to Kai

Khusrau for his march
through Chin, iv, 239
Khan of Chin and, welcome

Kai Khusrau, tv, 240
confirmed in the posses-

sion of Chin’ and
Machin, iv, 252
temp. Sikandar, ambassa-

dors from, come to Dara,
vi, 35

Sikandar visits as his own
ambassador, vi, 170

gives audience to Sikandar,
vi, 170

entertains Sikandar, vi, 171

answers Sikandar, vi, 172

gifts of, to Sikandar, vi,
173

sends envoy with Sikandar,

Vi LS

temp. Bahram Gur, 165

daughter of, the wife of
Shangul, vii, 115

hears of Bahram Gur’s ex-
ploits in Hind, vii, 129

invites Bahram Gur to visit
him, vii, 129

Bahram Gur’s reply to, vii,
130

temp. Nushirwan, viii, 97

| Faghfur, son of Sawa, viii, 74,

75, 120
confused with Faghfir of
Chin, viil, 74

parley of, with Bahram
Chiubina, viil, 112

head of, on spear, viii,
132
250 GENERAL

Failakis (Philip II of Macedon),
grandfather in franian
legend of Sikandar (Alex-
ander the Great), 158, vi,
Ry LO2 tie 125. 03 O.abal.
DSTO 2a ivilly eo ee aval
387

wars with Darab, vi, 22

allied with the king of Rus,
Vi, 22

marches from ’Ammuriya to
encounter Darab, vi, 23

defeated and returns to
*Ammiurlya, vi, 23 |

sues for peace, vi, 2

agrees to send tribute, and |

give his daughter in
marriage, to Darab, 158,
vi, 24, 25 |

adopts Sikandar as his heir,
Vl, 27

Faith, Faiths, the four, vi, 92,

95

of Christ, Christian, vi, 133, |
352, 350 |

of Ahriman, ii, 358; vi, |
281, 290

Faithful, Commander of the, ix,
2
*Umar, the first, ix, 72 and
note
Fakirs, the, vi, 61
Alexander the Great and,
vi, 61
Onesicritus and, vi, 61
Fakka’, a kind of drink, i, 43 |
note
Falatin (Plato), vii, 100; viii, |
264 |
Falconry, ii, 108, 196; vi, 176; |
vii, 42, 48 seq., 54, 55, 76
and note
origin of, i, 126
Famine, See Drought.
Farab (Fariyab? q.v.), iv, 185
Farab (Firabr), desert and town
on the right bank of the
Oxus opposite to Amwi,
G-U-,. Vil, OL, (92
desert of, ix, 115, 118
Fara’in, franian chief, vii, 207

INDEX
Faramarz, son of Rustam, 146’
T57, iW, 4, 319% 341 seq.’

349, 351, 354; ll, 18, 307

35, 36, 202, 323, 325, 326°
328 Vga Ve 35 yA
182; 183, 198; 231, 260;
261-272 WO tee 2 Ole e208:
284

parentage of, ili, 323

appointed to expel the
Turkmans from Zabulis-
tan, ili, 31

referred to, v, 184

Zawara and, sent by Rustam
to bid Zal and Rudaba
prepare to receive Asfan-
diyar, v, 190

slays Mihr-i-Nush, v, 22

goes to Rustam and Asfan-
diyar, v, 247

marches against Kabul, v,
274, 276

takes the corpses of Rustam,
Zawara, and Rakhsh from

the pits, and conveys
them to Zabul for burial,
Vv, 274 seq.

fights with the king of
Kabul and puts him
and his kin to death, v,
27 Oe 2a,

makes a Zabuli king of

Kabul, v, 277
returns to Zabul, v, 277
hears of Bahman’s invasion
and marches against him,

v, 287
defeated and put to death,
v, 288
| Faranak, wife of Abtin and
mother of Faridun, 1, 90,
145, 157

Faridin brought up by, on
Birmaya’s milk, i, 15!
taken by, to Mount

Alburz, i, 152
told by, about his origin,
i, 153

prays for Faridun’s safety,

i, 158
GENERAL

Faranak, rejoices over Faridin’s

success, 1, 175
gifts of, to Faridin, i, 176
Faranak, daughter of Barzin,
vii, 53
married
Vii, 53
Farangis, daughter of Afrasiyab,
wife of Siyawush, and
mother of Kai Khusrau,
145, 146, 148, ii, 270 seq.,
288 seqg., 299, 306, 373,
381, 386 seq. ; ili, 96, 117,
203, 211
Mandane and, identical in
legend, ii, 191
Siyawush marries, ii, 270
Afrasiyab summons, _ to
court, li, 300 seq.
Siyawush confides in, ii, 307
seq.
Afrasiyab appealed to by,
li, 317 seq.
imprisoned, ii, 320
sentenced, li, 322
Piran saves and takes charge
of, ii, 324 seq.
Kai Khusrau born of, li, 326
dwells at Siyawushgird, ii,
333
instructs Kai Khusrau how
to find Bihzad, ii, 374
gives Giv the mail of
Siyawush, ii, 376
crosses the Jihun, ii, 392
provided for by Kai Kaus,
li, 399
Fariburz marries, iii, 148
referred to, ili, 146 seq., 202 ;
lv, 205, 213, 216
death of referred to, iv, 304
Farat (Euphrates), river, 158,
V3. 204, 300); “'V1,"°37, 42)
43, 290; viii, 93, 250

to Bahram Gur,

Darab cast away upon, v,

295
Farayin (Guraz, Shahrbaraz q.v.),
Shah, 175, ix, 50, 53, 105
accession-speech of, ix, 52
counselled by his eldest son,
ix, 52

INDEX

Farayin, counselled by his
youngest son, 1x, 53
misrule of, ix, 53
plot against, ix, 54
Farfuriyis (Porphyrogenitus ?),
Ruman general, 167, vii,
218
defeated by Nushirwan, vii,
256
makes report to Cesar, vii,
260
Farghan, Ruiman architect, and
Khusrau Parwiz, viii, 401
seq.
Farghana, region south of the
Jaxartes, east of Sughd,
lil, 109

251

| Farghar, Turanian hero, ili, 250

goes to spy on Rustam, iii,
250
reports to Afrasiyab, iii, 253

_ Farhad, {franian hero, ii, 73, 85,

T3ISN3TO6339,/340 5 li La,
20, 25, 34, 45, 48, 127,
268, 289, 313, 327, 331,
B52 Ve. hee? be 25s
42, 147, 292

Parthian origin of, iii, 11

goes as envoy to the king of
Mazandaran, i, 63

takes part in the Fight of
the Seven Warriors, i,
III

steed of, iii, 313

goes with Rustam to rescue
Bizhan, iii, 334

left in command by Giv,
iv, 83

put in command of the left
wing, iv, 92

left at Gang-bihisht, iv, 219

| Farhad, franian general, temp.

Niushirwan, vii, 251
commands left wing, vii, 251
Farhad, lover of Shirin, vili, 192

| Fariburz, son of Kai Kaus, r48,

RST wily 302,099; Sib;
335, 336, 340, 358, 405
seq., 409; lv, 14, 24, 32,
45, 50, 145 Seq., 164, 166,
TOF R7An 177, Loe Loz,
GENERAL INDEX

Fariburz—cont.

ZIT 2E3 205), 2305) 230;
253, 258, 268, 289, 331;
iV, 13, 34, 37, 91

encampment of, described,
li, 155

claims of, to the throne sup-
ported by Tus, ii, 401,
ili, 13 :

recognises Kai Khusrau as

Shah, ii, 410

Kai Khusrau’s letter to,
iii, 84

reads to the chiefs Kai
Khusrau’s letter, and
supersedes Tus, iii, 86

sends Ruhham to Piran, iii,
87

obtains an armistice and
prepares to renew the
campaign, ii, 89

fights and is defeated, ili, 90

returns to [ran, iii, 111

asks Rustam to support his
suit to Farangis, iii, 146

marries Farangis, ili, 148

leads the van of Rustam’s
expedition to succour Tis,
iii, 148

meets Gidarz, ili, 163

joins forces with Tas, iii,
169

goes to Kai Khusrau with
tidings of victory, ili, 236
Seq.

returns to the host, ili, 241,
243

commands the right wing,
Vine

superseded pro tem.
Katmara, iv, 92

chosen to fight with Kulbad,
iv, 97

slays Kulbad, iv, 99

commands with Tukhar the
troops from Khawar, iv,
148

slays Fartus, iv, 181

commands the right, iv, 191

takes part in the siege of
Gang-bihisht, iv, 199

by

, Fariburz, Kai Khusrau remon-
strated with by, and
other nobles for refusing
audience, lv, 275

Kai Khusrau’s gift to, iv,
295

sets out with Kai Khusrau
on his pilgrimage, iv, 306

| refuses to turn back when

bidden by Kai Khusrau,

| lv, 307

Kai Khusrau farewells and
warns, and his comrades,
iv, 308
disappears and is sought

in vain by, and his com-
rades, iv, 308

vainly reminds his com-

rades of Kai Khusrau’s
warning, iv, 309

end of, iv, 309

| Faridtn (Thraétaona), Shah, son

of Abtin and Faranak,r4o,

Ifl, 53; i, 30; 42, 54, 55,

go seq., 142, 286, 336, 341,

349, 351, 364, 370, 382,

384, 385; WW, II, 17, 19,

21, 29, 33, 36, 37, 99, 193,

195, 204, 237, 274, 318,

327, 392, 400, 404; M1,

| 24; 37; 2452257 2 4Vs 47%,

 

66, 69, 89, 91, 142, 149,
T5L 53, . 200, L745 203;
204, 221, 222, 255, 259,
260, 262, 266, 269, 286,
289, 299, 313, 328; V, 32,
34, 160, 180, 196, 204
seqg., 245, 260, ZOU mee 7te
283)5) vin 173; £72) 209;

406; vii, 37, 38, 60, 62,
73, 79, LOL, 120, 199, 207 ;
VilteErZOnN205, 2100; 230,
242, 260, 300, 376 seq.,

391, 392; 1X, 25, 39, 53>
71, 86, 103

mythological origin of, i, 171
seq.

Zahhak’s dream of, i, 147
seq.

advent of, prophesied, 1,
149
GENERAL
Faridtn, birth of, i, 150

father of, slain by Zahhak, i,
151

brought up on the milk of
the cow Birmaya, i, 151

taken by his mother to
Mount Alburz, i, 152

palace of, burned by Zahhak,
i, 152, 153

questions his mother about
his origin, i, 152

contemplates revenge on
Zahhak, i, 154 :

dissuaded by his mother, i,
154

Kawa revolts to, i, 157

resolves to war with Zahhak,
i, 157

brothers of, i, 158

ox-head mace invented by,
i, 158

rewards the smiths, i, 158

goes to fight Zahhak, i, 159
Seq.

visited and instructed by
Surush, i, 159

life of, attempted by his
brothers, i, 160

saves himself by his magic
power, i, 160

van of, led by Kawa, i, 160

crosses the Arwand (Dijla,
Tigris), i, 160

enters Zahhak’s capital, i,
161

overthrows Zahhak’s talis-
man, i, I61

seeks in vain for Zahhak, i,
162

finds the sisters of Jamshid,
i, 162

hears where Zahhak is, i, 163

Story of, and Zahhak’s min-
ister (Kundrav), i, 164

doings of, reported to Zah-
hak by Kundrav, i, 165

attacked by, and _ over-
throws, Zahhak, i, 168,
288

counselled by Surtsh about
Zahhak, i, 168, 169

INDEX 253

| Faridin, becomes Shah, i, 168

 

fetters Zahhak upon Mount
Damawand, i, 169
Reign of, r4o, i, 171 seq.
Note on, i, 171 seq.
three sons of, 1, 174, 177
ethnical significance of, 1,
54
accession of, i, 174
holds a feast, i, 175
makes a progress through
the world, i, 176
builds himself a seat, i, 177
sends Jandal on a mission, i,
177
receives Jandals report, 1,
182
instructs his sons how to
deal with Sarv, i, 182
sons of, outwit Sarv, i, 184
receive Sarv’s daughters
in marriage, i, 185
return home, 1, 186
proved by Faridun, i, 186
named by Faridun, i, 187
wives of, named by Fari-
dun, i, 188
horoscopes of, taken by
Faridun, i, 188
divides the world among
his sons, i, 189
grows old, i, 189
Salm and Tur write to, to
demand the abdication of
fraj, i, I9QI
makes answer to his sons, 1,
193
holds converse with fraj, i
195
writes to Salm and Tur, i, 197
fraj’s head sent to, 1, 202
mourning of, for fraj, i, 203
seq.
sight of, injured by mourn-
ing for fraj, i, 204
hopes for issue from fraj, i,
205
recovers his sight, i, 206
gifts of, to Minuchihr, i, 207
gives a feast to the nobles,
1, 207
254

Fariduin, receives an embassage

from his sons, i, 209

makes answer to his sons,
te 2nT

sends Minuchihr to fight
with Salm and Tur i, 215

hears of Mintchihr’s vic-
tory, i, 222

Mintchihr sends the heads
of Salm and Tur to, i, 222,
229

welcomes Minuchihr on his
return in triumph, i, 230

confides Minuchihr to Salm,
eo

gives thanks to God and
prays for death, i, 232

distributes the spoil to the
troops, 1, 232

enthrones Mintchihr, i, 232

passes his last days in
austerities, i, 232
dies, i, 232

burial of, 1, 233
mourning for, i, 233, 237
Firdausi’s reflections on, i,
170, 232
final warfare of Zahhak
with, i, 278, cf. 173
Mount Sipand besieged by
order of, 1, 329
Grace of, 1, 335
saying of, ii, 219 and note
flag of =flag of Kawa, vi, 59
capital of, vii, 215, 238
Farikin (Maiyafarikin, Martyr-
opolis), city in Roman
Armenia, vii, 200
taken by Kubad, vii, 200
Fariyab, city half way between
the town of Marvrid and
Balkh, iv, 65

Farr, i, 82. See Grace.

Farruhan  (Farrukhan). See
Farayin.

Farrukh, ruler of Nimrtz, viii,
375

Farrukhan (Farruhan). See
Farayin.

Farrukhanzad (Farrukhzad g.v.),
Vili, 195

GENERAL

INDEX

Farrukh-Hurmuzd (Hurmuzd
q.v.), father of Rustam,
ix, 69

Farrukhzad (of glorious birth),
name assumed by Gush-
tasp in Rum, iv, 351 seq.,
357, 360

| Farrukhzad, Shah, 175, ix, 61

seq., 70

Siyah Chashm and, ix, 62
poisons, ix, 63

Farrukhzad (Farrukhanzad q.v.),

son of Hurmuzd, brother
of Rustam, and favourite
of Khusrau Parwiz, ix, 23,
87, 92, 95

conspires with Guraz, viii,
408, 412

goes to the host, vili, 412

rebels in favour of Shirwi,
Vili, 413

brother of, viii,
note

conspires with Tukhar, viii,
414

proclaims Shirwi Shah, viii,
416

hears where Khusrau Par-
wiz is hiding, viii, 419

holds talk with Khusrau
Parwiz, vili, 420

bribes Mihr Hurmuzd to
murder Khusrau Parwiz,
IX, 33

defeats the Arabs, 1x, 85

counsels Yazdagird, ix, 86,

413 and

87

leads the host to I<hurasan,
ix, 89

entrusts Yazdagird to

Mahwi, ix, 95
goes to Rai, ix, 96
Farrukhzad, f[ranian warrior,
viii, 241, 296
speech of, vili, 240
Farsang (parasang), measure of
length, about 3.88 miles,
Doe:
Farshidward, son of Wisa and
brother of Piran, Ttrran-
lanshero, T52) i 92)3 sii,
GENERAL INDEX 255

Farshidward—cont.

90, 166, 198, 205, 252;

ive. 10, 11O; T22, Les;

133, 153, 160, 162
summons Piran to save

Farangis, ii, 322
commands with Lahhak the
right wing, iv, 26
attacks the franians in
flank, iv, 82
opposed by Zanga, iv, 83
goes to help Piran and
attacks Giv, iv, 85
prowess of, iv, 86
fights with Guraza, iv, 87
Bizhan, iv, 87
Lahhak and, put in joint
command, iv, 84
Piran’s instructions to,
iv, 95
hear of the death of Piran
and the coming of Kai
Khusrau, iv, I12
lament for Piran, iv, 112
take counsel with the
host, lv, 113
fight and escape [ranian
outpost, iv, 116
referred to, iv, 118, 120,
126
repose themselves, iv, 121
corpses of, brought back
by Bizhan, iv, 126, 132
deaths of, announced to
Afrasiyab. iv, 152

Farshidward, brother of Asfan-

diyar, 155, v, 20, 22, 110,
TAA Te Lye
governor of Khurasan, v, 77
stationed on the [ranian
right, v, 94
mortally wounded by Kuh-
ram, Vv, 95, IOI, 104
Asfandiyar laments for, v,
IOI, 104
resolves to avenge, v, 104
dies, v, 104
shrouded by Asfandiyar, v,
105

Farshidward, a miser, 164, vil,

07 seq.

Farid,

Farshidward, a miser, Bahram

Gur visits, vil, 68 seq.
pretended destitution of,
vii, 68 seq.
wealth of, described, vii, 70,
72, 73

Farttis, Turdnian hero, iii, 182,

213,231, 251
comes to aid Piran, iii, 152
hears of the coming of
Rustam, ii, 175
slain by Fariburz, iv, 181
son of Siyawush and
Jarira daughter of Piran,
and half brother of Kai
Khusrau, 145, 147, i, 92,
37017 A113) 2OL ell. O, 004,
42 Seq., 72, 85, 87, 93, 107,
Hilts LZe SNE i ee
Vv, 30
birth of, ii, 291
hostility of Tus to, ili, 13
Story of, 147, ili, 37 seq.
referred to, ill, 39
advised by Tukhar, iii, 47,
52 seq.
interview of, with Bahram,
ill, 47 seq.
birth-mark of, ili, 49
gives his mace to Bahram,
ili, 50
eighty slaves of, the, ill, 55
their mockery of Tus, 10,
50
their mockery of Giv, iii,
58
slays the steed of Tus, ili, 56
wounds the steed of Giv, inl,
58
slays the steed of Bizhan,
Sabri (éne
worsted by Bizhan, iii, 62
attacks the Iranians, ili, 63
prowess of, ili, 64
mortally wounded, ili, 64
dies, ili, 65
mother and_ slaves. of,
destroy themselves, ii, 66
burial of, ili, 68
Kai Khusrau’s grief for, ili,
84 seg., 112
250

Fartid, son of Shirin and Khusrau
Parwiz, 1x, 39
Farukhzad. See Farrukhzad.
Farwardin, genius, i, 88; iii,
287, 328
name of month and day, 1,
88, 133, 263 ; ili, 230, 286,
SIs S25 su lS omnes
363,; vill, 367, 371
origin of, 111i, 286
Faryan, king, father-in-law of
Kaidrush, 759, vi, 66, 67,
T24Nsege, Ll, Lge
city of, taken by Sikandar,
vi, 124
slain, vi, 125
daughter and son-in-law of,
taken prisoners, vi, 125
brought before Naitkun,
vi, 126
sentenced to death, vi, 126
pardoned, vi, 126
Faskin, forest in Rum, iv, 333,
335 Seq. ~
Wolf of, 154
described, iv, 333, 336
Mirin bidden by Cesar to
slay, iv, 333
Gushtasp undertakes to
slay, iv, 336
keeps tusks of, iv, 338
tusks of, produced before
Cesar by Hishwi, iv,
351
referred to, iv, 359
Fatima, daughter of Muhammad
and wife of ’Ali, i, 12
See Abt’l ’Abbas Fazl.
See Mihrgan, Nauruz,
New Year’s Day, Sada.
Ferghana. See Farghana.
Fight of the Seven Warriors, 143,
li, 82, 107 seq.
Firdausi, Persian poet and
author of the Shahnama,
TA6) ThA. missy LOOM LS;
I By 22 USCo a nO OO),

Fazl.
Feast.

110) he) Thi Miit., -aolsh, —7/e,
272) VY, 9130, 8 L8onesl4,
S165 ¥v, 5 LO; 2ONSe7..6 295
282); “Vij 16) 9704 Seg,

GENERAL INDEX

Firdausi—cont.

72, 78, 80 seg, 197, 198,
202), 250; 254204), 313),
BTS SZ Sees 2Om S20
368 ; vil 3, 4, 6, 153, 156,
159) 195, 186) 1685 213;
2TAs (217 Sege,| 3073 Vall;
71, 73, 74, 187, 190, 192,
193, 1x, 69

materials for the life of, i,
23 seq.

personal references of, in the
Shahnama, i, 24 seq.
conclusions from, i, 35

date of birth of, i, 24

Muhammadan of the Shi'ite
sect, 1, 24, 106, 107

fond of wine, i, 25; iv, 313;
Vv, 164, vi, 291, 306, 309,
3S TAn S025 SOO; ne Wily 277)

owned or occupied land, i,
25) Vina aA C2

escape of, from drowning, 1,
26, 29

son of, i, 26; vill, 190
referred to (?), 1,

VAL 2778 oe

death of, 173, i, 26; viii,

273

190
complains of old age, 160,
Le2 Oia iis S Or. alvz. Ader

Vv; 2025 Vil, 220

patrons, friends and helpers
of, i, 29 ség., 35, 39, T10;
Exo ee

exempted from taxation, i,
35, 39; 1X, 121

Nizami’s account of, i, 38

seq., 45
later legends of, ili, 15, 109,
191; iv, 8
Dakiki, and. See Dakiki.
Mahmud and, See Mah-
mud.
Satire of. See Mahmud.
Shahnama of. See Shah-
nama.

Yusuf and Zulikha of, i, 45

admits Muhammadan tradi-
tions into Shahnama,
Vill, 42
GENERAL INDEX 257

Firdausi, and rhyme-word, viii,
397, note
account of Arab conquest
by, supplemented, ix,
65

5
Yazdagird’s death, ix, 70,

107
reflections on, ix, 108,
TET
on completion of Shahnama,
ix, 121
time spent on Shahnama,
ix, 122

praise of Sultan Mahmiud-
See Mahmud
Fire, ancient cult of the Aryans,
i, 7, 49, 50
priests of. See Magi.
region of, li, 56
Hushang’s discovery of, 1,
123
institution of the Cult of,
i LLO. 123
Feast of Sada, i, 124
ordeal by, 1r44, li, 218 seq.
sacred, vi, 2I, 201, 212
Fire—fane or temple, 154.
Azar Abdadagan,
gashasp, Barzin.
—worship, abolition of, pro-
phesied, viii, 68
Firuz, franian king, iv, 149
Firizabad. See Gur.
Firtizi Kuh, pass in the Alburz
range, li, 28
mythological, i, 71, 72,
T40, 252) 32 1153-200) :) iv;
279; vil, 341 and note,
400; vili, 212 and note
salt, the, legend of, vi, 76

See

Azar-

Fish,

seq.
—eaters. See Ichthyo-
phagi.
Fleece, Golden. See Golden.
Flesh-meats, introduction of,
attributed to Ahriman,

i, 138
Flight, of Muhammad, referred
to; ix 122
Flying-machine, of Kai Kaus, ii,
103

VOL, IX,

| Fo-lin, vi, 73 and nole
| Footman (pawn), piece in chess,

 

vii, 385
position of, vii, 388
move of, vii, 422

promotion of, vii, 422

| Ford and toll-house of Zark, ix,

roo and note, 116

hill, Malcolm’s descrip-
tion of a, i, 236
Fortifications vitrified vi, 79,165

Fort,

| Bount of tIife, the, vi, 74
Seq. ,158 seq.
Sikandar’s expedition to,

vi, 158 seq.
account of, in the Pseudo-
Callisthenes, vi, 74 seq.
Sikandar fails to find, vi,
160
Founts, the Seven, viii, 392
Four, Wonders of Kaid. See
Kaid.
Faiths, vi, 91, 95
Frangrasyan (Afrasiyab, 4q.v.),
PSO ei Ole er SOrs ely.
137, 138
Frashékart, son of Gushtasp, v,
26
Frasiyav (Afrasiyab, q.v.), 1,
B380rn Me Ox
Fravashi, i, 369; ii, 82; iii, 286
Frazdanava, lake or river, v, 13

| Friba, sacred Fire, vi, 201, 255

leader of Khan’s_ host,
temp. Nushirwan, vil, 330
Fur (Porus, q.v.), dynastic title
and Indian king, temp.
Sikandar, 759, vi, 31, 51,
625 O64) Ero, seq) 123, 132;
135, 137, 170, 172, 175;
vu, 395
Dara’s letter to, vi, 50
Sikandar’s war with, vi, 67,
II2 seq.
routed by Sikandar’s iron
steeds, vi, 116
single combat of, with Sik-
andar, vi, 117
slain, vi, 117
troops of, submit to Sikan-
dar, vi, 118

Funj,

R
258

Furthil, Iranian hero, r5r, iv,
24, 33
chosen to fight with Zan-
gula, iv, 97
slays Zangula, iv, Io1

G

GABRIEL, angel, i, 114; Iv, 140;
vi, 138 note
(Kahan, town
Juwayn on the Farah
tiver which flows into
the northern end of the
Lake of Zirih in Sistan ?)
I49, lil, 152, 177, 224, 225
Gahar, Turanian hero, 149, ii,
216, 224, 251
comes to aid Piran, ili, 152
slain by Rustam, ili, 225
Gaiimart, the first Shah and
culture-hero, and the first
man in Zoroastrian tradi-
tion, 790; 1,90, Ole) LO;
123° Vi; <2ZOOn Ville Ae
55, 260, 269, 310, 376
Reign of, i, 117 seq.
Note on, i, 117
greatness of, i, 118
culture-hero, i, 118
son of, i, 119
slain by Black Div, i, 120
envied by Ahriman, i, 119
warned by Surush, i, 119
grief of, for the death of
Siyamak, i, 120
bidden by Surtish to avenge
Siyamak, i, 120
goes with Hushang to fight
Black Div, i, 121
death of, i, 121
Firdausi’s reflections on, i,
121
rites of, vil, 53
Faith. of, vii, 273; ‘Vii, 277
Galbwi, [ranian chief, ix, 74
Galinush, put in charge of Khus-
rau Parwiz, vill, 421; ix,
5) IL, be
parley of, with Kharrad and
Ashtad, ix, 12 seq.

Gahan above

GENERAL INDEX

_ Gandarep, monster, i, 143

slain by Keresaspa, i, 172,
173
Gang, mountain, iv, 162; v, 216
Gang, sea of, li, 362

Gang, stronghold in Turan and

 

| Gang-dizh

seat of Afrasiyab, ii, 241,
261, 300, 344, 357, 369;
Lily 236; (2598 ver 250
king of=Afrasiyab, iv, 134
two places known as, iv, 136
=Gang-bihisht q.v., iv, 190,
TO5,) LO 745L96,, 202,205)
DESe 22056 221-220, 232
=Gang-dizh q.v., iv, 247
Gang-bihisht, north of the Jax-
artes, stronghold and seat
of Afrasiyab, 152, iv, 135,
136, 207 seq., 228
Afrasiyab at, iv, 187
marches from, iv, I90
returns to, iv, 196
described, iv, 195.
prepared for a siege by
Afrasiyab, iv, 197
besieged by Kai Khusrau,
iv, 198, 208 seq.
taken by storm, iv, 209 seq.
occupied by Kai Khusrau
for a while, iv, 218
Gudarz left in command of,
iv, 219
Gustaham, son of Naudar,
left in command of, iv, 238,
Kai Khusrau dwells for a
year in, iv, 254
(Gang-i-Siyawush),
stronghold, 145, 153, iv,
135, 136, 186 note, 203,
257.204, ix 2
possible identification of, i,
189
meaning of, ii, 19
building and description of,
Hi, 270. Seq:
Afrasiyab takes refuge at,
iv, 230
Kai Khusrau resolves to
pursue Afrasiyab to, iv,
231
marches to, iv, 247
GENERAL

Gangdizh, Kai Khusrau, forbids
his troops to injure, iv, 247
enters, iv, 248
remains a year at, iv, 249
advised by his paladins
to leave, iv, 249
appoints a governor for,
iv, 249
distributes treasure at, iv,
250
Gang-i-Dizhukht (Baitu’l Muk-
addas q.v.), i, 161, 226
Gang-i-Siyawush. See Gang-
dizh.
Ganges, Indian river, vi, 64
Garamik-kart. See Girami.
Garcha, Turanian hero, iil, 152
comes to aid Piran, iii, 152
Garden of the Hesperides, vi, 74
Indians, viii, 196
Gardener, a, vi, 341
entertains Shapur son of
Urmuzd, vi, 341 seq.
sent by Shapur to the high
priest, vi, 344
describes Shapur, vi, 344
rewarded by Shapur, vi, 357
Gargwi, franian hero, v, 109
commands the left, v, 109
Garib, surface-measure, vil, 215
and note
Garshasp. See Keresaspa.
Garshasp, son of Zav, Shah, 142,
i, 90, 91, 174; ii, 336
Reign of, i, 373 seq.
Note on, i, 373
relation of, to Keresasp, i,
174
accession of, i, 374
death of, i, 375
Garshasp, [ranian hero, i, 42,
PAA 207s 22) 2TAS 230;
345.5 14 7 th 200) 27335
v, 202
relation of, to Keresaspa, 1,
174
Garshasp, [ranian chief, temp.
Shapur son of Ardshir, vi,
297
single combat of, with Baz-
anush, vi, 297

 

INDEX 259
Garshasp, [ranian noble, temp:
Nushirwan, viii, 18
Garsiwaz, brother of Afrasiyab,
145, 150, 153, 1, 92, 342,
349; ii, 3, 188, 189, 193,
EOS e220; 230. Seg... 249,
253, 264, 268, 269, 286,
289 seq., 313 seq. ; iil, 197,
208, 306, -310, 350, 352;
iv, 10, 135 seg., 209 seq.,

259. 2089 “Vine S25 1s
103

defeated by Siyawush, ii,
229 seq.

sues for peace to Siyawush,
li, 237 seq.

fails to string the bow of
Siyawush, li, 266

visits Siyawush, li, 289

envies Siyawush, ii, 292

challenges Siyawush, ii,

slanders Siyawush, ui,
seq.

betrays Siyawush, u,
seq.

compasses the death
Siyawush, ii, 315 seq.

charged with the execution
of Farangis, ii, 322

goes to Manizha’s palace,
lll, 301

finds Bizhan, il, 302

takes Bizhan before Afra-
siyab, Ui, 303

ordered to execute Bizhan,
lil, 304
imprison Bizhan, ili, 309
disgrace Manizha, iii, 309

put in charge of the ele-
phants, iv, 156

reinforces Afrasiyab, iv, 181

Jahn and, compel Afra-
siyab to quit the field, iv,
182

commands the rear, iv, 191

taken prisoner by Rustam
at the storming of Gang-
bihisht, iv, 210

referred to, iv, 211

sent to Kai Kaus, iv, 233

imprisoned, iv, 235

seq.
seq.
294
296

301

of
260

Garsiwaz, sent for by Kai Kats
and Kai Khusrau, and put
to the torture, iv, 265
voice of, attracts Afra-
siyab from lake, iv, 265
holds converse with Afra-
siyab, iv, 266
slain by Kai Khusrau,
209
Garsiyun, franian chief, ix, 115
Gashan, as rhyme-word, viii,
397 note
Gashasp, franian chief, vi, 394
addresses the nobles on the
succession to the throne,
vi, 394
Gashasp, [ranian general, temp.
Niushirwan, vii, 251
put in charge of baggage-
train, vli, 251
Gashasp, Iranian noble, viii, 17,
18
Gashasp, father in Shahnama of
Bahram Chubina, vili, 76,
99, 162, 169, 304
Gashasp, father of Ashtad q.v.,
TXotT
Gathas ai) (3): vaenree 2 07
Gaugamela, village near Nineveh,
vl, 31, 32 note
battle of, vi, 31
Gaumata (the false Smerdis),
Magus, vi, 207
usurpation, and death of, i,
58
overthrow of, celebrated at
the Magophonia, i, 59
“Gav, king of Hind, 169, vii, 395
Seq.
mother of, vii, 395 seq.
two marriages of, vii, 395,

iv,

396

two sons of, vii, 395,
390

becomes queen, vii, 397

tries to keep peace be-
tween her sons, vii, 397
Seq.

hears of the death of Tal-
hand, vii, 419

reproaches Gav, vii, 420

GENERAL INDEX

Gav, mother of, chess invented
to appease, vii, 421
death of, vii, 423
birth of, vii, 395
tutor of, vii, 397, 398, 401,
402, 407, 408, 410, 413,
417, 421
rivalry between
and, vil, 397 seq.
war between Talhand and,
vil, 404 seq.
attempts of, at accommoda-
tion with Talhand, vii,
405, 408, 413
defeats Talhand, vii, 412
proposes a decisive battle to
Talhand, vii, 414
victory of, vii, 416
invents chess to console his
mother for the death of
Talhand, vii, 421
city in south-western
Palestine, vi, 30
siege of, by Alexander the
Great, vi, 30
Gazhdaham, franian hero and
castellan of White Castle,
TAA Me SOON hate 32s
134, 138, 139, 145, 146;
lil, 15, 25, 33, 40, 45, 294;
lv, 13, 24, 149
besieged by Barman, i, 354
relieved by Karan, i, 354
Suhrab described by, ii, 136
evacuates White Castle, il,
137
Gedrosia (Makran, Baltichistan),
vi, 69
See Gilan.
Gemini, constellation, vi,
Vill, GO, 20304 1s, 73
Genealogical tables
Pishdadian dynasty, i,
gI
KKaianian dynasty, li, 3
Sasanian dynasty, vi, 3
Kings and heroes of Turan,
i, 92
franian ‘heroes, ii, 4
Genealogies, fictitious, v,
20058 20315) Vien Q9;

Talhand

Gaza,

Gelani.
Dis

99,

282,
21

 
GENERAL

Genealogies, of Papak in Tabari,
vi, 200
Mas’tidi, vi, 200
Geography, Firdausi’s, ii, 28
Darmesteter on, li, 79, 80
Geometrician, vi, 377
Geopothros (Gotarzes q.v.), ili, 9
George, Armenian general, viii,
195
Germanus, vii, 218
Germany, vi, 73
Gharcha (Georgia), country be-
tween the Caucasus and
« the Aras, iv, 14, 65
king of, iv, 149
Gharchis (Georgians), vil, 94
Ghatkar, ruler of the Haitalians,
q.v., 168; vii, 334, 335
hears of, and destroys, the
Khan’s embassy to Nush-
irwan, vii, 330
prepares to oppose the Khan
vil, 330
defeated, vii, 332
Ghaznin, city in Afghanistan,
the capital of Sultan
Mahmud, i, 20, 257; iv,
TAs LS eeVlls 73
Ghee, clarified butter, vi, 105
Ghul, a sorceress, i, 42; v, 117,
128
referred to, v, I21
described, v, 130
slain by Asfandiyar, v, 131
Ghundi, a div, ii, 44, 54, 55,
O37 ail) 6250); Iv; 2901;
Vv, 204
district in Afghanistan
between Harat and Ghaz-
nin, ii, IOT
Ghuz, a Turkish tribe and desert
east of Gurgan, iv, 60
Gil, Gilan, district on the south-
west coast of the Caspian,
TOT; 1,,.2303 230m 11,220;
293)> WVeLbAG, 205) 2Ov,, 13s;
Virw 22°77 nVAl 8 224, SAO}
362, 1X, 93
river of=Kizil Uzun, also
called Safid Rud, iv, 154
waters of =Caspian, i, 230

Ghur,

 

INDEX - 261

Gil, Afrasiyab’s camp in, iv, 155
Nushirwan’s dealings with,
vii, 216, 242 seq.
captives from, settled at
Sursan, vii, 328
Gimirra. See Kimmerians.
Gipsies, the, 265, vii, 6
N6éldeke on, vii, 6
language of, vil, 6
brought into fran by Bah-
ram Gur, vil, 149

| Girami (Garamik-kart), son of

Jamasp, 155, v, 24 seq., 58
death of, foretold by Jam-
asp, v, 50
worsts Namkhast, v, 59
rescues Kawa’s flag, v, 59
slain, v, 59
Giravgard, Turanian stronghold
on the Oxus, iii, 73, 80
occupied by the [ranians,
ili, 78
Girduni, Sirdarra, pass in the
Alburz range, ii, 28; vi,
32
Sawachi, pass in the Alburz
range, ii, 28
Girdkuh, fortress, v, 30
Girih (Jirrah), place south of
Shiraz, vi, 199
Giv, franian hero, son of Gudarz,
and father of Bizhan, 146-
I51, 154, u, 4, 25, 33, 35:
38, 62, 70, 73; 85, 91, 127,
T3o Seg €40, 050, 156)
160, 188; 193, °197,.272,
318, 319, 338, 340, 349,
351, 362, 388 seq. ; ili, 11,
13, 18, 19, 27, 33, 45, 48,
seq. 57, 67, 75, 7% 81, 85,
86, 89 seq., 96, IOI seq.,
108, III, 114 Sseg., 121 seq.,

127, 129, 130, \133, 139
seq., 143, 154, 155, 157,
159, LOY, ©69) 170; LS2;
183, 187, 200, 21%, 227,
231, 238, 244, 245, 247,
248, 253, 255, 259, 264,
268, 273, 289, 291, 292,
294, 296 seg., 302, 305,
262

GENERAL
| Giv,

Giv—cont.

307 Séq., 311 Seq., 330 Seq.,
337 S€q-, 359, 353 Seq. ;
UIs Ff Oly HELE DESIR UU ES) ir)
seq., 26 séq., 39 séeq., 52,
54, 56, 59, 69, 82 seq., 90,
99, 102, 136, 147, 157, 223,
D202 ne 2OB mSCO Ram 2O2:
290, 306 ‘Seq: Vv, 207,
208; vi, 194; viii, 168
meaning of, li, 335
historical character, iii, 9
relationship of, to Rustam,
li, 155, 365, 384; i, 323
son of Gidarz, li, 158
wife of, ii, 365, 384; iii, 323
SISter Of, 11535454114 823

father of Bizhan, ii, 366
and note
solicitude of, for Bizhan,

ill, 15

harries Mazandaran, ii, 39

taken prisoner in Mazan-
daran, ii, 40

released by Rustam, ii, 58

taken prisoner in Hama-
varan, li, 90

released by Rustam, ii, 97

goes in search of Kai Kaus,
ii, 104

takes part in the Fight of
the Seven Warriors, ii,
107 seq.

bears letter from Kats to
Rustam, ii, 139

encampment of, described,
Tine

helps to saddle Rakhsh for
the fight with Suhrab, ii,
160

Suhrab described by, ii, 166

quarrels with Tus over the
future mother of Siya-
wush, ili, 194

sent by Gudarz to seek Kai
Khusrau, ii, 364 seq.

finds Kai Khusrau, ii, 370

receives the mail of Siya-
wush, ii, 377

exploits of, in defence of
Kai Khusrau, ii, 378 seq.

 

INDEX

tells how he captured
Piran’s wife and sister, ii,
383

overthrows Piran

host, li, 385

releases Piran, ii, 387

at the Jihtn, ui, 391 seq.

announces Kai Khusrau’s
arrival in fran, ii, 394

accompanies Kai Khusrau
to Ispahan, li, 396

rewarded by Kai Kaus, ii,
399

goes on an embassy to Tus, ii
400

bears Kai Khusrau’s letter
to the castle of Bahman,
li, 408

undertakes to slay Tazhav,
iii, 28
burn the barricade at the

Kasa rud, iii, 29

horse of, wounded by Farid,
ili, 58

lends Bizhan the mail of
Siyawush, iii, 60, 69

sees Palashan approaching,
ili, 69

burns the barricade at the
Kasa rud, iii, 73

parleys with Tazhav, iii, 75

rouses the [ranians, iii, 81

tallies the host, ili, 91

many kindred of, slain, ili, 94

urges Bahram not to return
to the battlefield, ii1, 96

goes in quest of Bahram, iii,
102

takes Tazhav captive, iii,
102

buries Bahram, iii, 104

made adviser to Tus, iti, 116

interrupts Tus’ parley with
Human, iii, 122

raids Khutan, iil, 247

steed of, 11, 257

worsted by Puladwand, iii,

and his

258
interferes in the fight
between Rustam and

Puladwand, iii, 263
GENERAL INDEX 263

Giv, opposes Bizhan’s expedi-

tion to Irman, iii, 291

' questions Gurgin about Bi-
zhan, ili, 311

wroth with Gurgin, ii, 314

appeals to Kai Khusrau, iii,
315

comforted by Kai Khusrau,
ili, 315, 318

sent to summon Rustam,
li, 319

met by Zal, ili, 321

tells Bizhan’s case to Rus-
tam) 111.322

announces Rustam’s ap-
proach to Kai Khusrau,
ili, 326

goes to welcome Rustam,
iil, 353

holds parley with Piran,
iv, 20

overtures of, rejected and
returns to Gidarz, iv, 21

commands the rear, iv, 24

referred to, iv, 39

tries to stop Bizhan from
fighting Human, iv, 40, 43

over-ruled by Gutdarz, iv,
43

refuses to lend  Bizhan
the mail of Siyawush, iv,

repents of his refusal, iv,

son of=Bizhan, iv, 76

ordered to dispatch troops
to oppose Lahhak and
Farshidward, iv, 82

sends Zanga and Gurgin, iv,
83

leaves Farhad in command
and attacks with Bizhan
Piran’s centre, iv, 83

defeats Ruin, iv, 84

fights with Piran, iv, 84

attacked by Lahhak and
Farshidward, iv, 85

superseded pro tem. by
Shidush, iv, 92

chosen to fight with Gurwi,
iv, 97

 

Giv, takes Gurwi prisoner, iv, 100

opposes Bizhan’s going to
help Gustaham, iv, 119

consents to Bizhan’s going
to help Gustaham, iv, 120

brings Gurwi before Kai
Khusrau, iv, 127

given a command, iv, 149

commands the real, iv, I9f

takes part in the siege of
Gang-bihisht, iv, 199

goes with the captives to
Kai Kats, iv, 233

gives Kai Kats tidings of
Kai Khusrau, iv, 234

rewarded by Kai Kats, iv,
2360

returns to  Gang-bihisht
with letter for Kai Khus-
rau, iv, 238

made governor of the coun-
try between the sea and
Gang-dizh, iv, 246

welcomes Kai Khusrau on
his return from Gang-
dizh, iv, 250

rewarded by Kai Khusrau,
lv, 252

Gudarz and, meet Hum, iv,
263
hear of Him’s adventure

with Afrasiyab, iv, 263

Kai Khusrau remonstrated
with by, and other nobles
for refusing audience, iv,
275

sent by Gudarz to summon
Zal and Rustam, iv, 278

bidden with other chiefs by
Kai Khusrau to make an
assembly on the plain, iv,
291 seq.

Kai Khusrau’s gift to, iv,
295

receives grant of Kum and
Ispahan, iv, 298

sets out with Kai Khusrau
on his pilgrimage, iv, 306

refuses to turn back when
bidden by Kai Khusrau,
iv, 307
2604

Kai Khusrau farewells
and warns, and his com-
rades, iv, 308
disappears and is sought
in vain by, and his
comrades, iv, 308
end of, iv, 309
grief of Gudarz for, iv, 310,
312
Givgan, franian hero, ii, 109,
155; ii, 34; Iv, 24
Gloom, the (Land of Darkness),
TOO Wwe 30nd 79
conception of, vi, 73
visited by Asfandiyar, v, 76
Sikandar’s expedition to,
vi, 74 Seq.
account of, in the Pseudo-
Callisthenes, vi, 74 seq.
Sikandar hears of, vi, 158
enters, vi, 159 seq.
emerges from, vi, 162
jewels of, vi, 162
Glory, the divine. See Grace.
Glove, The, Browning’s poem

Giv,

of, referred to, vi, 384
note

Go-between, old woman as, i,
280 seq.

Gog and Magog (Yajuj and
Majuj, g.v.), the barbarous
nomads of northern Asia,
Lp LOM nv INE (So

Golden, Age, i, 129, 134

boot, iv, 34, 180, 243, 282,
300, 359
Fleece, land of the, i, 57

Gomer. See Kimmerians.
Good Thoughts, Words, and
Deeds, Zoroastrian for-

mula LOO} Vil) 307, S06
symbolised in the game of
nard, vii, 381
Gordyene, kingdom,
Armenia, vi, 198
Gotarzes, Parthian king and
franian hero (Gutdarz,
q.v.), iil. 109
memorial tablet of, ill, 9
Geopothros, iii, 9
coin of, ill, 9

south of

 

GENERAL INDEX

| Gotarzes, war of, with Vardanes,

Lie LON rn
Meherdates, 11, Io seq.
character of, in _ history,
lili, 10
Grace or Glory, the divine, i,
Ti, Li4 et LO 2s lO
seq., and passim
account of, 1, 82
visible appearances of, i, 82,

L3O; ESAS COL ar
seq.
Granicus, river in» Asia Minor

flowing into the Propon-
tis (Sea of Marmara), vi,
30
battle of the, vi, 30, 31
Grapes, bunch of, Kubad and
the, vii, 183 note
Greece, vi, 30
Greed and Need, personification
of, vi, 146; Vii, 71, 205,
“206, 368, 369
Greek, Greeks, i, 10; Vv,
vi, 82
relations of, with the fran-
ians, 1, 14
history and legend in rela-
tion to Persian dto, li, 9
conception of India, vi, 68
captives, mutilation of, by
the Persians, vi, 373
philosophers entertained by

Rey?

Nishirwan, vii, 280
Green, Prophet, the, See Al
Khidr.

sea, the, vi, 174 mote, vill,

46 and note

Gretna Green, vi, 323 vole

Griffon, fabulous bird, i, 235 and
note

Gudarz, son of Kishwad, franian
hero, and father of Giv, a
reminiscence of the Par-
thian king Gotarzes, q.v.,
146, 148, I51-153, 1, 423
ii, 4, 33, 35, 38, 62, 79,
735) 835 OL L277 nko eae
157, 177, 178, 193, 259
286, 290, 316, 318, 335,
338, 34, 349, 371 Seq., 384,
GENERAL

Gudarz—cont.

388, 394, 406; iii, 8, 11,
15, 18, 19, 24, 28, 33, 38,
40, 45 seq., 50, 51, 67, 81
seq., 85, 88 seq., 100, III,
D2. BLS Soe Lo, 20;
1295-220, 8027) 220) Seq;
134, 136, 137, 139, 143,
145, 149 seq., 154 seéq.,
TOA, 160, 2725, 177, 137,
205, 206, 211 seg., 220;
225232. 230.240.0259;
254, 255, 258, 264, 268,
273, 277, 289, 298, 302,
305, 308, 322, 327, 329
S€q., 337 Seq-, 354, 357
rea US) Fe), tele tele pp Keke
seg., 102, 103, 106 seq.,
113 Seq., 136, 145 seq.,
TAQ 0574) 202, 171, Loo;
TOi2OO. 2205227, 2202;
ZOO) | Vi) 207; 208'5) Vi;
194; viii, 104, 168; ix,
23

taken prisoner in Mazan-
daran, ii, 40

released by Rustam, ii, 58

receives Ispahan from Kai
Kaus, ii, 78

taken prisoner in Hama-
varan, ii, 90

released by Rustam, ii, 97

censures Kai Kaus, ii, 105

takes part in the Fight of
the Seven Warriors, ii, 107

mediates between Kai Kaus
and Rustam, ll, 144 seq.

encampment of, described,
ii, 153

sons and grandsons of, ii,
DSO Wl se
loss of, ili, 83 note, 94,

ies pois hie sts Cope air

survivors of, iv, 298

consoles Siyawush for his
mother’s death, li, 199

appointed ruler of Sughd
and Sipanjab, ii, 358

returns to fran, ii, 362

sees Surtish in a dream, ii,

363

 

INDEX 265

Gidarz, sends Giv to seek for

Kai Khusrau, ti, 364

hears of Kai Mhusrau’s
arrival in fran, ii, 395

welcomes I<ai IXhusrau and
Giv, U, 396

accompanies them to Is-
takhr, ul, 399

dispute of, with Tus, ii, 4oo
seq.

goes with Kai Khusrau to
the castle of Bahman, ii,
497

advises Tus to avoid
Kalat, ii, 41

supersedes Tus, ili, 83

informs Kai Khusrau about
Farid and the defeat of
the [ranians, iii, 83

sends Bizhan for Kawa’s
standard, li, 92

franian watchman and, iii,
156 seq.

meets Fariburz, ili, 163
Rustam, ili, 171

warns Rustam not to trust
Piran, ili, 212

sends Ruhham to help Rus-
tam, iii, 227

praises Rustam, iii, 248

steed of, ili, 313

goes to welcome Rustam,
ill, 353

sent to invade Turan by Kai
Khusrau, iv, 15

ordered to negotiate with
Piran, iv, 15

negotiations failing, marches
from Kaibad to meet
Piran, iv, 22

arrays his host, iv, 2

gives the right wing to
Fariburz, iv, 24
baggage to Hajir, iv, 24
left wing to Ruhham, iv,

24

rear to Giv, iv, 2

posts a watchman on the
mountain-top, iv, 25

takes his station at the cen-
tre, iv, 24
266

GENERAL

Gidarz, counsels Bizhan as to

his fight with
iv, 41

over-rules Giv’s objections,
iv, 43

rewards Bizhan, iv, 52

prepares to resist a night-
attack, iv, 53

gives a force to Bizhan, iv,
54

joins battle with Piran,
Iv, 55

writes to Kai Khusrau, iv,
56

sends Hajir with the letter,
iv, 57

receives Kai
reply, iv, 62

prepares to renew the fight,
iv, 63

receives Ruin with a letter
from Piran, iv, 67

entertains Ruin, iv, 68

dismisses Ruin with pre-
sents and the reply to
Piran’s letter, iv, 74

prepares for the flank-attack
of Lahhak and Farshid-
ward, iv, 82

sends Hajir with orders to
Giv, iv, 82

harangues the host, iv, 89

resolves to fight in person,
iv, 90, 92, 96

gives the left wing to Far-
had, iv, 92
right wing to Katmara, iv,

92
rear to Shidush, iv, 92
chief command to Gusta-
ham, iv, 92

instructs Gustaham, iv, 92

holds a parley with Piran
and arranges with him the
Battle of the Eleven
Rukhs, iv, 95 seq.

slays Piran’s steed, iv, 107

pursues Piran, iv, 108

calls on Piran to surrender,
iv, 108

Piran wounds, iv, 108

KKhusrau’s

Human, ©

 

INDEX

Gudarz, slays Piran, iv, 109

drinks Piradn’s blood, iv, 109
fetch

sends Ruhham_ to
Piran’s corpse, iv, 110

harangues the host, iv, 110
resumes his command, iv,

Te

calls for volunteers to pursue
Lahhak and Farsh‘dward

iv, I16
sends Gustaham, iv, 117

Bizhan to help Gustaham,

iv, I19

comes before Kai Khusrau
with the other champions,

LV; E20
receives Ispahan, iv, 129

commands the left wing, iv,

147

takes part in the assault on

Gang-bihisht, iv, 208

left in command at Gang-

bihisht, iv, 219

Giv and, meet Him, iv, 263
hear of Him’s adventure
with Afrasiyab, iv, 263

gives Kai Khusrau and Kai
Kaus tidings of Afrasiyab,

iv, 264

Kai Khusrau remonstrated
with by, and other nobles
for refusing audience, iv,

273

takes counsel with other

nobles, iv, 277

sends Giv to summon Zal

and Rustam, iv, 278

goes with other chiefs to

meet Zal and Rustam, iv,
282 :

audience of, with Kai Khus-

rau, iv, 283 seq.

holds, with other chiefs, at
the bidding of Kai Khus-
rau, an assembly on the

plain, iv, 291 seq.

Kai Khusrau’s charge to, iv,

294
gift to, iv, 295
asks Kai JKhusrau for

patent for Giv, iv, 298
GENERAL

Gidarz, goes with Kai Khusrau

on his pilgrimage, iv, 306

turns back at the bidding
of Kai Khusrau, iv, 307

laments the loss of the pala-
dins, iv, 310, 312

returns to [ran, iv, 310

promises fealty to Luhrasp,
iv, 312

grandsons of, go with Zarir
to Rum, iv, 360
hail Gushtasp as Shah, iv,

362
Giudarz, Ashkanian king, vi, 197,
210
Gudarzians, descendants of

Gudarz son of Kishwad,
Nig LHS. LL5,) 200) 21.4:
Gular, place, vi, 206
Gulgin (bright-bay),
Gidarz, iii, 366
steed of Luhrasp, v, 64
steed of Bahram Gur, vii, 57
Gulshahr, wife of Piran, ii, 269,
276, 288, 387, 390
prepares Jarira’s wedding
outfit, ii, 270
presents gifts to Farangis,
li, 275
announces the birth of Kai
Khusrau to Piran, ii, 326
referred to, ii, 383
Gulzarytn, river in Turkistan
(Jaxartes), li, 358, 381;
iv, 187, 189, 190, 218, 219;
Vii, 329, 340, 360
Gulnar, slave-girl of Ardawan,
vi, 217
meaning of, vi, 217 note
intrigue of, with Ardshir
Papakan, vi, 217 seq.
reports the presage of the
astrologers to Ardshir
Papakan, vi, 219
flees with Ardshir Papakan
to Pars, vi, 220
Gumbadan, mount and strong-
hold, v, 29, 86, 152, 171,
177,200), 1x, 93
situation of, v, 30
Asfandiyar warded at, v, 84

steed of

 

INDEX

Gund-i-Shapur (Shapur Gird, Ras
Shaptr, Kand-i-Shapur,
Jund-i-Shaptr), city in
Khuzistan, north-west of
Shushtar and now repre-
sented by the ruins of

267

Shahabad, vi, 295; vii,

219, 276

built for Roman captives,
vi, 295

Mani-gate of, vi, 327
Nushzad imprisoned at,
vii, 264 and note

Gur (Jur, Zur, Firtizabad), city
in Pars, south of Shiraz,
vi, 199, 205, 229 note, 230,
245

Gur, nickname of Bahram son of
Yazdagird, vii, 6

N6ldeke on, vii, 6

Guran, king of Kirman, iv,
146
Guraz (Shahrbaraz, Fardayin

q.v.), general of Khusrau

Parwiz and Shah, 1774,
I75, vill, 194, 408, 409
Sede A

conspires with Farrukhzad,
viii 408

invites Cesar to take [ran,
vili, 408

rebels, viii, 411 ; ix, 45
letters of, ix, 45, 46
letter of Piruz to, ix, 47
account of, 1x, 50
meaning of, ix, 50

dual personality of, ix,
50

marches on Taisaftn, ix,
51

confers with franian mag-
nates, ix, 51

misrule of, ix, 53

conspiracy against, ix, 54

goes hunting, ix, 55

end of, 1x, 55

Guraz, son of Mahwi,

referred to, ix, 107, 115

governor of Marv, ix, 120

put to death with his sons,
ix, 120
268

Guraza, [franian hero, 151, ii,
73, 340 ; ili, 20, 25, 34, 45,
AS (O22) LAT, 25355 Ave
15, 24, 34
takes king of Barbar prison-
eI, ll, 97
takes part in the Fight of the

Seven Warriors, li, 107
seq.

encampment of, described,
li, 155

goes with Rustam to rescue
Bizhan, i, 334
fights with Farshidward, iv,
87
chosen to fight with Siya-
mak, iv, 97
slays Siyamak, iv, 100
Gurazm (Kavarazem), a relative
of Gushtasp, 155, v, 12,
22 52 OO s LO elO2,elOA:
Seq., 171, 205, 261
envies Asfandiyar, v, 78
death of, referred to, v, 97
Asfandiyar addresses the
corpse of, v, 105
Gurdafrid, daughter of Gazhda-
ham, 744, il, 119, 138
referred to, il, 131
encounter of, with Suhrab,
li, 132 seq.
beguiles Suhrab, li, 133 seq.
Gurdgir, son of Afrasiyab, u,
g2
commands the troops from
Tartary, Khallukh, and
Balkh, iv, 156
Gurdwi, brother of
Chubina, 173, 174, viii,
TA 120258 205, 200, 250,
293, 295, 296, 298, 342,
349, 354, 358 ; 1x, 6
a legitimist, viii, 74
Gustaham and, persuade
Khusrau Parwiz not to
make a night-attack, villi,

Bahram

224

takes charge of baggage,
viii, 228

Bahram Chubina writes to,
vili, 285

GENERAL

 

INDEX

Gurdwi, fights with Bahram Chu-

bina, viii, 294

receives province, vill, 313

informs Khusrau Parwiz of
Gurdya’s doings, vili, 356

writes to, and sends Khus-
Taw, Parwize, letters sto;
Gurdya, viii, 360

wife of, goes with letters to
Gurdya, vili, 360

hears of the plight of Rai
and informs Gurdya, vill,
307

Gurdya, sister of Bahram Chiu-

bina; “272; 07 Sey 07 7s
119; viii, 74, 104 note,
187, I91, 347, seq., 358
3656) 110

a legitimist, vill, 74

present at council, viii, 164

speech of, viii, 165, 167,
171

referred to, viii, 221

counsels Bahram Chubina,

vill, 221

laments Bahram Chubina,
vill, 340

resident at Mary, vill, 346

seq.

informs her followers of the
Khan’s offer of marriage,
vili, 349

starts for fran, viii, 351

parleys with Tuwurg, viii,
352

arrives at Amwi, viii, 354

doings of reported to Khus-
rau Parwiz, vill, 356, 358

met by Gustaham, vili, 356

asked in marriage by Gusta-
ham, vili, 357

receives letters from I<hus-
rau Parwiz and Gurdwi,
vill, 360

plots murder of Gustaham,
viii, 360

justifies murder of Gusta-
ham, vili, 361

reports death of Gustaham
to Khusrau Parwiz, viii,
301
GENERAL INDEX 269

Gurdya, dresses up as a warrior

to please Khusrau Parwiz,
Vill, 363

prowess of, in drinking,
vili, 364

appointed overseer of royal
bower, vili, 364

diverts Khusrau Parwiz and
saves Rai, viii, 368

Gurgan (Hyrcania), province

watered by the Atrak and
Gurgan rivers on _ the
south-eastern shores of
the Caspian, 168, iv, 61 ;
vi, 373; Vii, 89, 237, 337,
338, 357, 358, 361; viii,
15, 355; 1x, 89

Abu’l Kasim of. See Abt’l
Kasim.

Gurganj, one of the two capitals

of Kharazm (Kat (Kath)
being the other), situated
on the Persian side of the
Oxus, iv, 60

Gurgin, son of Milad, franian

hero, 250, ©5I, il, 33, 35,
O24 7On 7331054) 005) 127,
138, 144, 316, 340, 394 ; iil,
Mie LOL 2On2 5s 4O LOS:
nS, e020, LA5, VS2,) 20,
253, 264, 268, 273, 285,
289, 292, 294 seqg., 300,
B05 SLOMSeg S22. 323,
331 seq., 345, 346, 352;
LV LS aloe 2iy ZAG 1 Aur
Gl, 202 Vill, 72.200, 206

takes part in the Fight of
the Seven Warriors, ii,
107 seq.

undertakes embassage to
Afrasiyab, iii, 29

goes with letter from Kai
Khusrau to Rustam, iil,
274

accompanies Bizhan to Ir-
man, iil, 292

refuses to help’ Bizhan
against the wild boars,
ili, 293

envies and beguiles Bizhan,
iii, 294

 

Gurgin, goes with Bizhan in

quest of Manizha, ili, 296
searches for Bizhan, ili, 310
finds Bizhan’s steed, ili, 311
questioned by Giv about

Bizhan, iii, 312
false account of, about Biz-

han’s disappearance, iil,

313
Giv’s wrath with, iii, 314
appears before Kai Ikhusrau,

iii, 316
imprisoned, ili, 317
appeals to Rustam, iil, 331
released, ili, 333
goes with Rustam to rescue

Bizhan, 11, 334
pardoned by Bizhan, iti, 346
opposes Lahhak, iv, 83
chosen to fight Andariman,

iv, 97
slays Andariman, iv, 104
Kai Khusrau remonstrated

with by, and other nobles

for refusing audience, iv,

283 seq.
audience of, with Kai Khus-

rau, iv, 283 seq.

| Gurgsar, tribe, v, 43 and note
Gurgsar, Turanian hero, 156, v,

ive SEOpee LAO 235
note

made captain of the host by
Arjasp, v, 46

given command of one wing,
v, 50

persuades Arjasp to remain
and fight Asfandiyar, v,
108, 109

made leader of the host, v,
109

taken prisoner by Asfandi-
yar, v, III

offers to guide Asfandiyar to
the Brazen Hold, v, 113

goes as guide with Asfandi-
yar to Turan, v, 120

offered the kingdom of the
Turkmans by Asfandiyar
in return for faithful ser-
vice, v, I20
270

Gurgsar, describes the route to
the Brazen Hold, and the
Seven Stages, v, 120 seq.,
EZAUSEG), 826, £32, LS4
chagrin of, at Asfandiyar’s
successes, v, 124, 128,
Wiel 33
reproached by Asfandiyar
for giving false informa-
tion, v, 139, 140
offered the captainship of
the Brazen Hold by
Asfandiyar in return for
trusty guidance, v, 140
shows the franians a ford,
v, 140
questioned by Asfandiyar
for the last time, v, 141
curses Asfandiyar, v, 141
slain by Asfandiyar, v, 141
Gurkan (Juzjan), city and dis-
trict between Marvruid
and Balkh, iv, 65
Gurkils, tribe (?), viii, 15
Gurtikhan, franian hero, iv, 149
Gurwi, Turdnian hero, 745, I5I,
T52, li, 296, 314, 319, 338,
340; ill, 197, 199, 237;
LVi. 79 O09) LEe2525 V5
272
challenges and is overthrown
by Siyawush, ii, 295
advocates the execution of
Siyawush, li, 317
carries out the execution of
Siyawush, li, 320
chosen to fight with Giv, iv,
97
taken prisoner by Giv, iv,
100
brought by Giv before Kai
Khusrau, iv, 127
executed, iv, 129
Gurzban, vi, 394. See Gurkan.
Gushasp, sacred Fire, vi, 201
Gushasp, chief scribe, temp.
Bahram Gur, vil, II
bidden to remit the arrears
of taxes, vil, II

1 The Hystaspes of legend not necessarily the father of Darius I,

P 314 seq.

 

GENERAL INDEX

Gushasp, nonce-name assume]
by Bahram Gur, vii, 59
Seq.

Gushasp, nonce-name assumed
by Bahram Gur, vii, 59
seq.

Gush-bistar, a savage, vi, 80, 177
meaning of, vi, 177 note
interview of, with Sikandar,

Vi L771

Gushtasp (Vistaspa, Vishtasp,
Hystaspes'), son of Luh-
rasp, father of Asfandi-
yar, and Shah, 154-157,
I. AP en Ol peal eS Sun) mln
109; iv, 314 seq, 334
S€q., V, 24 seq., 61, 68, 90,

2 seq., 103 seqg., 119, 130,
148, 154, 155, 159, 166
seq., 180, 181, 183, 205,
200, 208 Séq., 213, 2165
220, - 221, 233 nole, 243;
2ASe SEG>,, ZL, 2995. 293i5
Vi; 20; 49,55, 200, 2535
250, 2522500 - Vibe t5Or
viii, 41, 68, 95, 148, 213,
270, 392, 393; 1x, 25
son of Luhrasp, iv, 318
jealousy of, respecting the
grandsons of Kai Kats,
iv, 318
asks Luhrasp to appoint him
heir to the crown, iv, 318
departs in wrath for Hind,
iv, 319
arrives at Kabul, iv, 320
overtaken by Zarir, iv, 320
takes counsel with the
chiefs, iv, 321
returns to Luhrasp, iv, 322
pardoned by Luhrasp, iv,322
determines to quit Iran, iv,

323

takes a steed of Luhrasp’s,
iv, 323

story of, in Rum, ii, 10;
iii, 285; iv, 324 seg:

interview of with Hishwi,
lv, 324

See Vol. iv,
GENERAL INDEX 271

Gushtasp, vainly seeks work in

Rum as a scribe, iv, 325
herdsman, iv, 326
camel-driver, iv, 326
blacksmith, iv, 327

dreamed of by Katayun, iv,
329

goes to Cesar’s palace, iv,
330

chosen for her husband by
Katayun, iv, 330

marries Katayun, iv, 331

spends his time in the chase,
iv, 332

makes friends with Hishwi,
iv, 332 and note

asked by Hishwi to under-
take the adventure of the
wolf of Faskun, iv, 335

undertakes to slay the wolf
of Faskun, iv, 336

provided with steed and
arms by Mirin, iv, 336

goes with Mirin and Hishwi
to the forest of Faskun,
iv, 337

prays for help, iv, 337

gives thanks for his victory,
iv, 338

- takes the wolf’s tusks, iv,
338

welcomed by Hishwi and
Mirin on his return, iv,
339

discovers to Katayun his
royal race, iv, 340

referred to, iv, 343 seq.

asked by Hishwi to under-
take the adventure of the
dragon of Mount Sakila,
iv, 345

bids Ahran provide a steed,
sword, and other arms,
iv, 345

goes with Ahran and Hish-
wi to Mount Sakila, iv,
346

takes two of the dragon’s
teeth, iv, 346

gives thanks for his victory,
Iv, 347

' Gushtasp, welcomed by Hishwi

 

and Ahran on his return,
iv, 347

accepts gifts from Ahran
and bestows part upon
Hishwi, iv, 347

returns to Katayun, iv, 348

goes to the sports on
Ceesar’s riding-ground, iv,
349

prowess of, at polo and
archery, iv, 350

questioned by Cesar, iv, 350

reproaches Cesar for his
treatment of Katayun, iv,

50

claim of, to have slain the
wolf and the dragon, iv,
351
confirmed by Hishwi, iv,

351

reconciled to Cesar, iv, 351

goes to court and is received
with honour by Cesar,
lv, 351

consulted about Ilyas by
Czesar, Iv, 353

leads forth the host, iv, 354

refuses the overtures of
Ilyas, iv, 354

brings the body of Ilyas to
Cesar, iv, 356

routs the host of Ilyas, iv,
350

returns in triumph to Cesar,
iv, 350

recognised by Zarir, iv, 360

goes to Zarir’s camp, iv, 361

hears of Luhrasp’s abdi-
cation in his favour, iv,
362

saluted as Shah by the
chiefs, iv, 362

invites Cesar to a feast, iv,

362

sets out for [ran with Kata-
yun, iv, 364

parts in good will from

Cesar, iv, 364
welcomed and crowned by
Luhrasp, iv, 364
272

GENERAL

Gushtasp, Reign of, 754, v, 9 seq.

Notes on, v, 9 seq.,116 seq.,
166 seqg., 260 seq.

division of, v, 9
points of interest in, v, 9
compared with that of
Darius Hystaspis, v, 10
diagram to illustrate, v,2

legend of Zarduhsht and, v,
18

black horse of, v, 18, 28

sees his place in Paradise, v,
19

Ridge of, v, 29

succeeds Luhrasp as Shah,
Vv, 31

sons of, v, 32

pays yearly tribute to Ar-
jasp, v, 32

converted by Zarduhsht, v,

33

helps to spread the Faith,
V, 34

establishes Mihr Barzin and
other Fire-fanes, v, 34

conversion of, recorded on
Cypress of Kishmar, v, 34

advised by Zarduhsht not
to pay tribute to Arjasp,
Vins)

receives embassage from
Arjasp and takes counsel
with his chiefs, v, 41

sends answer to Arjasp, v, 43

summons the host, v, 47

marches against Arjasp, v,
48

bids Jamasp foretell the
issue of the fight, v, 48

distress of, at Jamasp’s
prophecy, v, 53

encouraged to fight by
Jamasp, v, 54

gives Zarir the standard and
the command of the cen-

tre, v, 55

one wing to Asfandiyar,
Wao

other wing to Shidasp, v,
55

the rear to Nastur, v, 55

 

INDEX
Gushtisp, takes up his position

on a height, v, 55, 56, 63

referred to, v, 60, 64 seq.,
89

hears of the death of Zarir,
v, 64

wishes to avenge Zarir, v,
64, 68

dissuaded by Jamasp, v, 64,
69

offers his daughter Humai
to the avenger of Zarir,

v, 04
crown and throne to the
avenger of Zarir, v, 66

gives his steed and arms to
Nastur, v, 69

sees and laments over Zarir’s
corpse, Vv, 73

bids Nastur lead the host
home, v, 74

marries Humai to Asfandi-
yar, v, 74

gives Nastir a command
and bids him _ invade
Turan, v, 74

rewards the host, v, 75

builds a Fire-fane and makes
Jamasp its archmage, v,
le

Mansion of, v, 75

writes to his governors to
announce the defeat of
Arjasp, Vv, 75

receives embassies and tri-
bute from Czesar and from
the kings of Barbaristan,
Hind, and Sind, v, 75

makes <Asfandiyar chief
ruler of fran and sends
him to convert the world,
v, 76

sends the Zandavasta to
each clime, v, 77

Gurazm slanders Asfandiyar
to, v, 78

sends Jam4sp to recall As-
fandiyar to court, v, 80

convokes an assembly and
arraigns Asfandiyar, v,
82 seq.
GENERAL

Gushtasp, puts Asfandiyar in

bonds, v, 84

sends Asfandiyar to Gum.
badan, v, 84

takes the Zandavasta to
Sistan, v, 85

welcomed by Rustam and
Zal, v, 85

kings revolt from, v, 85

while in Sistan hears from
his wife of the sack of
Balkh and the captivity
of his daughters, v, 93

calls together his chiefs and
summons the host, v, 94

marches from Sistan toward
Balkh, v, 94

takes command of the cen-
tre, v, 94

thirty-eight sons of, slain,
and defeat of, in fight
with Arjasp, v, 95, 96

takes refuge on a mountain,
v, 96, 100

consults Jamasp, v, 96

sends Jamasp to Asfandiyar
with the offer of the crown
in return for help, v,
97

interview of, with, and pro-
mise to resign the crown
to, Asfandiyar, v, 106

commands the centre, v, 109

makes thanksgiving for vic-
tory, v, I13

promises to resign the crown
to Asfandiyar when he
has delivered his sisters
from captivity, v, 114

summons troops, rewards
Asfandiyar, and_ sends
him to invade Turan, v,
115

hears of Asfandiyar’s suc-
cess and writes to him, v,
160

gives a banquet on Asfan-
diyar’s return, v, 164

consults Jamasp and the
astrologers on Asfandi-
yar’s future, v, 168

VOL, IX,

 

INDEX 273

' Gushtasp, Asfandiyar recounts

his deeds to, v, 170 seq.

promises to resign the throne
to Asfandiyar when he
has brought Rustam and
his kin in bonds to court,
Vv, 173, 174

Asfandiyar sends the corpses
of Nush Azar and Mihr-i-
Nush, and a message to,
Vin 232

Asfandiyar’s last message to,
Vv, 249

hears of Asfandiyar’s death
and laments for him, v,
252

wrath of the nobles with, v,
252

reproached by Bishttan, v,
253
Humai and Bih Afrid, v,

254

Rustam’s overtures to, v,
250

Bishutan testifies in Rus-
tam’s favour to, v, 257

reconciled, and writes, to
Rustam, v, 257

advised by Jamasp to write
to Bahman, v, 258

writes to Rustam and Bah-
man to recall the latter,
v, 258

welcomes and gives Bahman
the name Ardshir, v, 259

tells Jamasp of his wishes
as to the succession, v, 279

dies, v, 280

Gustaham, son of Naudar and

brothersof suse nQOs tise
127, 330; iv, 194

Tus and, sent by Naudar
to conduct the Persian
women to Alburz, i, 351,

oo
hear of Naudar’s death, i,
304
passed over in the suc-
cession, i, 369, 37°
Kai Khusrau sends troops
to succour, iv, 157
274

Gustaham, son of Naudar, at-
tacks the Turanians, iv, 178
sent to Chach with troops,
iv, 188

reports his defeat of Khur-
akhan, iv, 193

takes part in the See on
Gang-bihisht, iv, 208

left in command of Gang-
bihisht, iv, 238

goes to welcome Kai Khus-
rau on his return from
Gang-dizh, iv, 252

left behind as viceroy on Kai
Khusrau’s return to fran,
iv, 254

Gustaham, son of Gazhdaham,*

franian hero, 152, i, 369;
li,.12, 58,107; ail, 19,25;
33, 45, 48, 59, 92, 93, 127,

129. 3A alee 477.
248, 253, 273, 289, 294,
3225350. Ive Fels, 5:
24, 33, 93, 132 Seq., 149,
IQI, 292

takes part in the Fight of
the Seven Warriors, ii,
107 seq.

friendship of, for Bizhan,
li, 15

lends Bizhan a steed, iii, 60

mounts behind Bizhan, iii, .

95

attacks Bidad, iii, 244

sends Bizhan to summon
Rustam, ili, 245

goes with Rustam to rescue
Bizhan, iii, 334

fights with Andariman, iv,
87

made commander in chief
pro tem. vice Gudarz, iv,
92

‘Gidarz instructs, iv, 92

resigns his command _ to
Gudarz, iv, I1I

volunteers to pursue Lahhak
and Farshidward, iv, 116

wounded, iv, 123

GENERAL INDEX

Gustaham, son of Gazhdaham,
rescued by Bizhan, iv,
124 seq.

healed by Kai Khusrau, iv,
133

Kai Khusrau remonstrated
with by, and other nobles
for refusing audience, iv,
275

audience of, with Kai Khus-
rau, iv, 283 seq.

Kai Khusrau’s gifts to, iv,
295

sets out with Kai Khusrau
on his pilgrimage, iv, 306

refuses to turn back when
bidden by Kai Khusrau,
iv, 307

Kai Khusrau farewells and
warns, and his comrades,
iv, 308
disappears and is sought

in vain by, and his
comrades, iv, 308

end of, iv, 309

Gustaham, franian warrior, temp.
Yazdagird son of Shapur,
vi, 394

lions of, slain by Bahram
Gur, vi, 410

Bahram Gur’s commander-
in-chief, vii, 85

Gustaham (Bistam q.v.),
maternal uncle of Khus-
rau Parwiz, 171-174, viii,
199, 200, 202, 204 seq.,
2272 DO, 2 BID Gig, E257
259, 269, 282, 289, 293,
295, 298; 1x, 4, 6

imprisonment of, vill, 77, 176

Bandwi and, escape and
revolt, vili, 182

informs Khusrau Parwiz of
the blinding of Hurmuzd,
viii, 184

referred to, viii, 189

revolt of, vill, 191, 355

saves Khusrau Parwiz from
Turk, viii, 220

1This is assumed in all cases where it is doubtful which Gustaham is meant.

Cf. Vol. i, p. 369.
GENERAL

Gustaham (Bistam), Gurdwi and,
dissuade Khusrau Parwiz
from making a_ night-
attack, vili, 22

treasurer, vili, 229 and note
accompanies Khusrau Par-
wiz in his flight, viii,
231
turns back and murders
Hurmuzd, viii, 232
rejoins Khusrau Parwiz, viii,
233
Khusrau Parwiz warned
against, viii, 255, 256
deceived by Czsar’s talis-
man, viii, 272
praised by Cesar, vili, 279
Bahram Chubina writes to,
villi, 285
chooses comrades for Khus-
rau Parwiz in battle, viii,
296
receives Khurasan vili, 313
summoned to court, vill, 355
hears of execution of Band-
wi, viii, 355
hears of Gurdya’s doings,
"villi, 356
goes to meet Gurdya, viii,
356
asks Gurdya in marriage,
vili, 357
Gurdya plots murder of,
Vili, 360
intimates of, beheaded, viii,
370°
assassination of, referred to,
ix, 16, 104 i

Gutschmid, Alfred von, on the
Cyrus legend in Ctesias,
vi, 195

Guzihr, Tribal King, vi, 198, 199

H

HaBasuH (Ethiopia), 760, vi, 149
people of, encountered by
Sikandar, vi, 149
Haftanbukht. See Haftwad.
Haft Khan, ii, 2

INDEX 275

, Haft Khwan, ii, 29; v, 117 and

note

of Rustam and Asfandiyar
compared, v, 117

Man, ii, 29

Haftwad (Haftanbukht, Asta-

wadh), Tribal King, r6r,
vi, 199
account of, in Tabari, vi,
205
daughter of, vi, 205, 206,
233, 234
becomes guardian of the
Worm, vi, 236
Noldeke and Darmesteter
on, vi, 206
son of, vi, 206
helps his father against
Ardshir Papakan, vi,
236
Story of, 161, vi, 232 seq.
seven sons Of, vi, 233, 235
rise to power of, vi, 235
builds, and migrates to, a
stronghold, vi, 235
Ardshir Papakan and, vi,
236 seq.
slain by Ardshir Papakan,
vi, 245

Haital, Haitalians, country and

people (White Huns),
dwelling north of the
Oxus, 166, 168, vii, 6,
B53, TOL, LO4 Laie 74.
TOL, 187. 197, °340),.342;
390; Vili, 45, 242, 329,
379, 377

origin and seat of, i, 19,
20

confused with the Turks,
vil,

Bahram Gur’s defeat of, vii,

4
help Piruz, vii, 156, 157
Pirtiz’s expedition against,
vii, 159, 164 seq.
tradition of, vii, 160
king of, vii, 160, 184
helps Kubad, vii, 198
Kubad’s flight to, vii, 170,
184, 198
276

Haital Haitdlians, Nushirwan’s
alliance with the Khan
against, vii, 317

Khan’s war with, vii, 328 seq.

Khan’s embassy to Nushir-
wan destroyed by, vil, 330

host of, levied to oppose the
Khan, vii, 331
defeated, vii, 332

Nushirwan’s help sought by,
Vil, 332

Faghanish made king by,
Vil, 333

Nushirwan takes counsel
concerning, vil, 333 334,

make submission to Nush-
irwan, vii, 360

Ha’ty, son of Kutiba, governor
of Tus and a patron of
Firdaust, i, 35, 39

Hajir, [ranian hero, 144, 157, ii,

E34) 30h LAO. SAO Lv,
103) 147, LOL

taken prisoner by Suhrab,
i, 131

misleads Suhrab, ii, 152 seq.

life of, attempted by Rus-
tam, li, 176

attacks Bidad, ili, 244

put in charge of the bag-
gage, lv, 2

bears letters from Gudarz
to Kai Khusrau, , iv, 57

rewarded by Kai Khusrau,
iv, 58

bears Kai Khusrau’s reply
to Gudarz, iv, 61, 62

goes with orders to Giv, iv,
82, 83

slays Andariman’s
iv, 87

chosen to fight with Sipah-
ram, iv, 97

slays Sipahram, iv, 104

Halab (Chalybon - _ Beroea,

Aleppo), city in northern
Sylia, iv, 359, 300; viii,

horse,

_ 41, 46, 47
Halai (Olympia (?), Nahid),
daughter, in legend, of

Philip II of Macedon, vi,19

 

GENERAL INDEX

Halai, reason for her repudiation
by Darab and her naming
her son Iskandar (Sikan-
dar), vi, 19

Halai-Sandartis. See Halai.

Hamadan (Ekbatana), city in
*Trak-i-’ Ajami, vi, 31 ; vii,
OVA 7S leon OS

Hamavaran (Yaman), south-
western Arabia, 143, ii,
25 om Sege mod, OOmsega.
TBO LAS SEG 2 Ln se
218, 250; iv, 296, 2909; v,
174, 207, 208, 2201+) viii;
104, 168

king of, 743, 1, 338; wu, 85
Seq., 93, 207 and note; v,

176
asks quarter of Rustam,
li, 97
releases Kai Kaus, ii, 97
Hamawan, mountain, 148, ii,
135, 137, 138, 142, 144,
T53) 25450050, LOL Lod
TO7, OO MeL Ze melt 7 ieee
299; v, 116
occupied by the franians,
ili, 132

Hamdan Gashasp, franian chief,
Vill, 122, 163, 204
speech of, viii, 166
Hamza, of Ispahan, tenth cen-
tury Arabic historian, vi,
257
Handgrip, as test of strength, il,
64, 66, 67; v, 208
Hani bin Mas’td, Arab chief,
vill, 190
Haoma. See Homa.
=Hum, 4.v.
Haraiti Bareza (Alburz,
mountain, iv, 137

q-v.),

| Haram, the environs of Mecca,

vl, 120 and note,
121

Haram, of Khusrau Parwiz, ix,
4

Harat,

65,

city in north-western
Afghanistan, ii, 101; in,
2220" 5 VIN en 7,2; el LO.
DLO PULL 3O i 73
 

GENERAL

Harat, early seat of Aryan civili-
zation, 1, 7
battle of, i, 21
Firdausi flees to, from Mah-
mud, i, 39
desert of, 11, 228; viii, 114
marchlord of. See Makh.
bestowed by Mahwi on his
son, ix, 115
Haris, father of Kais, viii, 250
Harith, father of Nadr, g.v., v,
166
Harith bin Jabala, prince of the
Ghassanians, vii, 217
protected by Justinian, vii,
207
war of, with Munzir, vii, 217
Harpagus, Persian noble, temp.
Astyages, il, 190
= Piran in legend, ii, ror
Harum (City of Women), 160, vi,
73, 153 Seq.
visited by Sikandar, vi, 153
seq.
Sikandar’s correspondence
with the ruler of, vi, 153
Seq.
Harunu’r-Rashid, Khalifa (A.D.
786-809), i, 14
Harut, angel, iii, 286, 288
“Harvest of Bahram,’ viii, 292
Hasan Sabbah (The Old Man of
the Mountain), v, 30
Hashim, Arab general, ix, 68
sent by Umar in pursuit of
Yazdagird, ix, 68
wins battle of Jalula, ix, 68
takes Hulwan, ix, 68
Hashimi, a descendant of Hashim
the great grandfather of
Muhammad, i, 25; vi, 362
and note
Hashimite=Muhammad, ix, 81
and note p
Hashish, murderer of Darius
Codomanus, vi, 32
Hatra (Al Hadr), city, vi, 321
seq.
account of, vi, 322
besieged, vi, 322
fall of, legend of, vi, 322

 

INDEX 277

Hatra, king of, vi, 323
Haug, his theory of the origin of
Zoroastrianism, ti, 8
Hauz, tank or pool, i, 203 and
note, vil, 50 and note
Hawk, hawks, domestication of,
by Tahmuras, i, 126
two white, Kai Kubdad’s
dream of, i, 385
Hawking. See Falconry.

Hay, sack of, Bahram Chubina

and the, viii, 109
Hazar, Hazaran, Turanian hero,
V, 24, 50, 59
Hazara, father of Kut, viii, 291
Hecataeus, Greek historian (6th-
5th centuries B.C.), vi, 13
Helenopolis, city in Bithynia, vi,
61
Heraclius, Eastern Roman Em-
peror (A.D. 610-642), v,
306 note; vili, 187, I9I ;
Lea 7
attempts of, for peace with
Khusrau Parwiz, viii, 194,
195
takes Dastagird, viii, 194
retreat of, vill, 195, 196
Shirwi’s letter to, ix, 7
alliance of, with Shahrbaraz,
IX, 43, 44
Hermit, Khusrau Parwiz and the
I72, Viil, 254
Herodotus, Greek historian (B.C.
484-425), ii, 9; iii, 191 ;
Vi, 13), 16, 68, 72,735 Vill;
193
legend of Cyrus the Great in,
ll, 190; vi, 195
Heroes, chief, of mixed descent,
1, 55
Vale of, vii, 6
Hesperides, Garden of the, vi,

. 74 . ,
Hierapolis. See Arayish-i-Ruim.
High priest, ‘emp. Shapur son of

Urmuzd, vi, 343 seq.
hears of Shapur’s return, vi,
344 :
informs the captain of the
host, vi, 345
278

Hijaz, north-westera Arabia,
vili, 24 and note, 66, 67
Hilal, Arab, ix, 69
slayer of Rustam son of
Farrukh-Hurmuzd, ix, 70
Himalaya (Himavat), mountain-
range dividing India from
Thibet, vi, 74, 81

Himavat. Sve above.
Himyar—Hamavaran (Yaman),
li, 79

Hind, Hindustan, 147, 159, 161,
LO5> TOO; i. 230s Zou
92, 228, 287, 289 ; iii, 30,

1525) LOA, OSs 77,2 OAs
225, 1222, 235 237 5a225,
ZAZE AV LAG OO mOGemn ag:

196; °208; 2725.31 7.58205
Vs 70,085,257) 202205.
277 | “vil 180) Sis sOl OS
and passim
land of sorcerers, i, 163
Mai of, i, 252
king of (Shangul) temp. Kai
Khusrau, iii, 162, 210,
218, 251
temp. Bahram Gur, vii,
IL3, L19, 1260) 128
temp. Nushirwan, viii, 52
lord of =Shangul, iii, 187
man of=Shangul, ili, 216
prince of, iv, 71
lord of =Mahmiud, iv, 142
monarch of, iv, 319, 321
kings of, send tiibute to
Gushtasp, iv, 75
ambassadors’ from,
to Darab, vi, 21
Dara, vi, 35
ruler of =Fur, vi, 51
Sikandar invades, vi, 98
silk of, vi, 99
king of = Kaid, vi, 103
Sikandar becomes king of,
vi, 118
people of, help the Sindians
against Sikandar, vi, 175
Raja of, 169. See Raja.
Bahram Gur’s visit to, vii,
5, 110 seq.
motive of, vii, 5

come

GENERAL

INDEX

| Hind, Bahram Gur’s visit to,

| Hindtya

| Hira

| Hirmund

 

fabulous, vil, 6
king of, entertained by
Bahram Gur, vii, 140
seq.
Nushirwan goes to, vii, 241
(Amida ?), city in
Roman Armenia, vii, 200
taken by Kubad, vii, 200
Hindu Kush, mountain-range in
Afghanistan, ii, 80
Hindustani, vii, 6
Gipsy language a debased
form of, vii, 6

_ Hiong-Nu, probably the Huns, v,
I

3
Hira, city west of the Euphrates
near Mashad ’Ali (Nedjef),
VA, 372i Ville 7a ee VT
188, I91; ix, 5, 66
seat of the dynasty of Al
Munzir, i, 55
kingdom of, ix, 65
abolished by
Parwiz, ix, 66
attacked by Persians, ix, 67
(Jebel Nur), mountain
north of Mecca, viii, 42
Hirbad, keeper of the women’s
house of Kai Kaus, ii, 202,
206

Khusrau

(Helmund), river in
Sistan in eastern [ran, i,
359, 359 sulle 321 5 V, 178;
192, 186" LOL. 196; 210,
285
referred to, v, 198, 231
Hisham ibn Muhammad _ ibn
Al-Kalbi, Arabic historian
(8th-9th centuries A.D.),
Vi, 305 avail, 73
Hishwi, Ruman_ toll-collector,
iv, 334 seq.
interview of, with Gushtasp,
iv, 324
becomes friends with Gush-
tasp, iv, 332
asks Gushtasp, on behalf of
Mirin, to undertake the
adventure of the wolf of
Faskun, iv, 335
GENERAL

Hishwi, goes with Gushtasp and
Mirin to the forest of
Faskun, iv, 337

Mirin and, welcome Gush-
tasp on his return, iv, 339

asks Gushtasp, on behalf of
Ahran, to undertake the
adventure of the dragon
of Mount Sakila, iv, 344

goes with Gushtasp and
Ahran to Mount Sakila,
iv, 346

Ahran and, welcome Gush-
tasp on his return, iv, 347

receives gifts from Gush-
tasp, iv, 348

confirms Gushtasp’s claim
to have slain the wolf and
dragon, and_ produces
their teeth to Cesar, iv,
5

-Hittite, Hittites, vi, 71

empire, vi, 71

Hiuen Tsiang, Chinese traveller
(A.D. 603-668), vi, 63
quoted, vi, 63, 73

Hoibaras, Persian slave, temp.
Astyages, vi, 195

Hold, The Brazen. See Brazen
Hold.

Holy Ghost, the, vi, 138 and note

Holy Questions, Mountain of the,

i, 62
Homa (Soma), a _ plant held
sacred by the Zoroas-

trians, i, 8 and note, ii, 8
juice of, ii, 8
referred to, iv, 138
Homer, vi, 13, 72
epic method of. contrasted
with Firdausi’s, i, 47
quoted, vi, 68, 73

Hormisdas I. See Urmuzd son
of Shapur.

Hormisdas II. See Urmuzd son
of Narsi.

Hormisdas (Urmuzd son _ of
Urmuzd son of Narsi),
Persian prince, takes re-
fuge with the Romans, vi,
318, 325

 

INDEX 279

Hormisdas, goes with Julian
to the East, vi, 325
Horoscope, 1, 152
of the sons of Faridun, i, 188
Lali: 251, 279
Rustam, i, 278, 307
Siyawush, ii, 196, 205, 234
Mirin, iv, 334
Shaghad, v, 264
Ardawan, vi, 218
Bahram Gur, vi, 376
Yazdagird son of Shapur,
vi, 390
Shirwi, viii, 372 ; ix, 16,17

| Horse, of Persian royalty, how

distinguished, 1, 410 note

Gushtasp’s black. See
Black horse.
(steed, knight), piece in

chess, vii, 285, 423
position of, vii, 388, 422
move of, vil, 422
Houri, maid of Paradise, i, 272 ;
1x, 81
House of Darkness, ix, 7
Crystal, ix, 25 and note
Houses, the Twelve, of the sky,
i, 103, 188
good influence of, i, 52

| Hrazdan, river in Armenia, v, 13

Hulwan (Arash), town, vii, 187,
201
situation of, vii, 187
Yazdagird retires to, ix, 67
taken by Hashim, ix, 68
Hum (Haoma, q.v.), hermit, 153,
iv, 135 seq., 259 Seq.
hears Afrdsiyab lamenting
in the cave, iv, 260
capture of Afrasiyab by, iv,
201
Darmesteter on, lv, 136
pities and unbinds Afrdasi-
yab, iv, 262

tells his adventure with
Afrasiyab to Gidarz and
Giv, iv, 363

Kai Katis and Kai Khus-
rau, iv, 264
suggests how Afrasiyab may
be recaptured, iv, 265
280 GENERAL INDEX

Hum, recaptures Afrasiyab, iv,
206

Huma. See below.

Humai (Huma), daughter of
Gushitaspy eis) jena Ls
25

marriage of, with Asfandi-
yar, Vv, 22, 74
ignored by Firdaust, v, 22

offered in marriage to the
avenger of Zarir, v, 64

taken captive by the Turk-
mans, v, 93, 100

goes with Bih Afrid to draw
water and meets Asfandi-
yar, v, 147

escapes from Arjasp’s pal-
aces Vz 1158

bewails Asfandiyar, v, 252

reproaches Gushtasp, v, 254

Humai (Chihrzad, g.v.), daughter
and wife of Bahman, and
mother of Darab, Shah,
TiS 7, 15 Oppllst 351.0) aL ORMEV:
ZS 2QONSEO a Vil 2O 22.
199

married to Bahman, v, 290

Bahman appoints, and her
issue, to succeed him, v,
291

Semiramis (?), v 293

genealogies of, v, 293

Reign of, 158, v, 292 seq.
Note on, v, 292 seq.

accession of, v, 294

Darab born of, v, 294

referred to, v, 296

hears of Ruman invasion
and bids Rashnawad lead
forth the host, v, 301

reviews the host, v, 302

affected on seeing Darab, v,
302

hears from Rashnawad
about Darab, v, 308

recognises that Darab is her
son, v, 308

thanksgiving largess of, v,
309

Rashnawad and Darab ap-
pear before, v, 309 seq.

| Humai, crowns, and excuses her-

|

 

self to, Darab, v, 310
proclaims Darab, v, 311

| Humai, franian chief, temp.

Bahram Gur, vii, 88
goes as envoy to the Khan,
vii, 87

| Hitman, son of Wisa and brother

of Piran, Turadnian hero,
144, 148, 149, I5I, i, 92;
ii, 129, 130, 132, 148, 150,
264, 390; ili, 90, 9I, 93,
LOS L20— SCOp ESB mSe ae
142, 149, 152, 153, 158,
TOO} LOOM I 77, Lo2y LOD
2O2) 2OS QO 2 TE 22 r7e
232, 234, 252, 259, 359;
iV; Js 9; LO) 29) segs 4A.
55, 56, 61, 75, 76, 91, 118,
152

Barman and, join Suhrab
with troops, ii, 129

Afrasiyab’s instructions to,
11020)

misleads Suhrab as to Rus-
tam, ii, 165, 169

reproaches Suhrab for spar-
ing Rustam, ii, 171

throws the blame for Suh-
rab’s death on Hajir, ii,
170

withdraws from fran under
safe conduct, ii, 176, 181,
182, 184

rescues Afrasiyab from Rus-
tam, li, 354, 355

persuades Afrasiyab to
abandon the pursuit of
Kai Khusrau, ii, 394

parleys with Tus, iii, 121

leads the host against Tus,
1 277

counsels Piran, iii, 134

pursues the frdnians to
Mount Hamawan, iii, 135

tallies the Turdnians, iii,
139

reconnoitres the franians,
lil, 174

informs Piran of the arrival
of Rustam, ili, 174
GENERAL

Human, parleys disguised with
Rustam, 1ii, 196
commands the centre, iv, 25
dissuaded from fighting by
Piran, iv, 30
parleys with Bizhan, iv, 45
armour of, donned by Bi-
zhan, iv, 51
Turanians’ grief at death of,
iv, 51
Huns; the, i 10s v,. 13)3" vi, 15)
vii, 153
settlement of,
kand, i, 19
White. See Haital.
Hur, father of Bihruz, vii, 72
Hurmuz (Urmuzd), Ashkanian
king, vi, 197
Hurmuz (Ormus), city and island
on the south-eastern shore
of the Persian Gulf, vi,
204
Hurmuz (Hormisdas III), Shah,
166, vii, 153, 186
appointed by Yazdagird to
succeed him, vii, 155
Reign of, vii, 156
Note on, vii, 156
defeated by Pirtz, vil, 157
pardoned by Piruz, vii, 156,
158
leads the van in the war
with the Turkmans (Hai-
talians), vii, 164
perishes in battle, vil, 168
Hurmuz, minister of Bahram
Gur, vii, 26
Hurmuzd (Hormisdas IV), son
of Nushirwan, Shah, 169-

at Samar-

j2,) Vii 279. Vill, 56
seq., 69 seq., 74 seq., 78,
87, 147, 169, 170, 174,
LO6,) 200) e202 = 2Ls 222)
232 205-6270. 5904, meai2,
332, 355, 379, 376; ix, 4,
15, 104

son of the Khan’s daughter,
vii, 317

sent against the Turks, vii
317

examination of, viii, 3, 57

 

INDEX 281

Hurmuzd (Shah), counselled by
Nushirwan, viii, 25 seq.
Nushirwan’s testament in
favour of, and last coun-

sels to, viii, 61 seq.
Reign of, 170, viii, 70
Note on, viii, 70
character of, viii, 70
system of administraticn of,
vill, 71
justice of, viii, 71
instances of, viii, 90 seq.
scribes executed by, viii, 71
insult of, to Bahram Cht-
bina, viii, 76
Lazic war renewed by, viii,

76
Bahram Chubina’s gift of
swords to, viii, 76
accession of, viii, 78
turns to evil courses, viii,
81
puts to death Izid Gas-
hasp, viii, 83
poisons Zarduhsht, viii, 83
seq.
schemes against and puts
to death Sitmah Ffarzin,
vuli, 85 seq.
attempts to suborn Bahram
Azarmihan, viii, 85 S€Qs5
gives audience, viii, 86
hears state-secret {rom Bah-
ram Azarmihan, viii, 88
puts to death Bahram Azar-
mihan, vili, 89
repentance of, viii, 90, 93
places of residence of, viii,
90
wars of, viii, 92
attacked by Sawa, viii, 92
Sawa’s letter to, vili, 93
attacked by Cesar, villi, 93
Khazars, vili, 93
Arabs, vili, 93
consults the franians, viii,

94

counselled by his wazir, viii,
94

makes peace with Cesar,
vili, 95
282

Hurmuzd (Shah), attacks and de-
feats the Khazars, vili, 95
sends for Mihran _ Sitad,
viii, 97
hears prophecy about Bah-
ram Chubina, viii, 98
orders search to be made for
Bahram Chubina, viii, 99
discovers and sends_ for
Bahram Chubina, viii, 100

consults Bahram Chubina,
Vili, 100
gives chief command _ to

Bahram Chubina, viii, 102
questions Bahram Chubina,
vill, 103
gives Rustam’s banner to
Bahram Chubina, vili, 105
sends Mihran with Bahram
Chubina, viii, 106
intelligencer after Bahram
Chubina, viii, 107
to recall Bahram Chubina,
viii, 108
Kharrad, son of Barzin,
as envoy to Sawa, viii,
I1O
hears of Bahram Chubina’s
victory, viii, 132
makes thanksgiving, viii, 132
tewards Bahram Chubina
and the troops, vili, 133
surveys spoils sent by Bah-
ram Chubina, vili, 150
grows suspicious of Bahram
Chubina, viii, 151
dismisses the Khan with
gifts, viii, 152
hears from Kharrad of Bah-
ram Chubina’s disaffec-
tion, vili, 160
consults with high priest,

vill, 161
Ayin Gashasp, viii, 174,
177

plans to make away with
Khusrau Parwiz, viii, 174

hears of Khusrau Parwiz’
flight, viii, 176

imprisons Bandwi and Gus-
taham, viii, 176

 

GENERAL INDEX

Hurmuzd (Shah), hears of the
murder of Ayin Gashasp,
vili, 182

dethroned and blinded, viii,
183, 200

visited in prison by Khusrau
Parwiz, viii, 185, 198, 230

requests of, to Khusrau Par-
wiz, viii, 199

referred to, viii, 211

counsels Khusrau Parwiz,
Vili, 230

murdered, viii, 232

| Hurmuzd Garabzin or Galabzin

(Kharrad son of Barzin
q.v.), vili, 190
Hurmuzd, priest, vii, 188
assists Nushirwan in _ his
disputation with Mazdak,
vii, 188, 206
Hurmuzd, franian general, vii,
251
commands the outposts in
Nushirwan’s army,vii, 251

| Hurmuzd (Hurmuzdshah, Far-

rukh-Hurmuzd 4q.v.),
father of Rustam, ix, 72,
78, 85, 89, 96
Hurmuzd Shahranguraz (Shah-
ranguraz q.v.), ix, 54
Hurmuzd, devotee, ix, 102
pleads with Mahwi for Yaz-
dagird, ix, 102
Hurmuzdagan, vi, 193, 199
battle of, vi, 193, 199, 202,
256

Husain, friend of Firdausi, ix,

I21

| Hushang, son of Siyamak, min-

ister of Gaitimart, and
Shah, 139, 140, 1, 42, 90,
OLIn2O a2 OA eve uae
286, 292, 302; v, 180,
245.5; Vil; 37, 273; Vis
376; ix, 25, 41
Firdausi’s etymology of, i,
121
goes with Gaiimart to fight
the Black Div, i, 121
slays the Black Div, i, 121
Reign of, 140, i, 122
GENERAL INDEX

Hushang, Reign of, Note on, i
122
succeeds Gaitimart, i, 122
culture-hero, i, 123
discovers fire, i, 123
institutes Fire-worship, i,123
founds the Feast of Sada, i,

124

domesticates animals, i, 124

dies, i, 124

Firdausi’s reflections on, i,
124

rites of, vii, 53
Faith of, viii, 380
Hiushdiv, Turanian hero, v, 46
put in charge of the rear, v,
46
Hushyar, astrologer, vi 372, 375
takes Bahram Gur’s horo-
scope. vi, 176
Hushravah (Kai Khusrau, q.v.),
iv, 137, 138
Hutaosa, wife of Gushtasp, v, 11
=Atossa (?), v, II
Hvyaonas (Khyons, Chionitae ?),
people, v, 13
Hyapates, son of Semiramis, v,
292
Hydaspes, 7d.
Hydaspes (Jhilam), river in the
Punjab, vi, 18, 31, 62, 63
Hydraotes (Ravi), river in the
Punjab, vi, 64
Hyperboreans, the, vi, 74
Elysium of, vi, 74
Hyphasis (Beas), river in the
Punjab, vi, 64
Hyrcania (Gurgan, q.v.), ii, 27;
Mit) LO! avi,373
Giv, prince of, iii, 9
Hystaspes (Gushtasp, q.v.), iv,
314 seq.
Hystaspes, father of Darius I, v,
10
governor of Parthia, v, Io

I

IpLis, the Muhammadan Devil,
I40, I43, tv, 206, 282; v,
174, 218

 

283

Iblis, occasional substitution of
for Ahriman in the Shah-
nama, i, 50, 70 ; ii, 82, 110

tempts Zahhak, i, 136 seq.

turns cook, i, 137 seq.

causes serpents to grow out
of Zahhak’s shoulders, i,
139

counsels, garbed as a leech,
Zahhak, i, 139

Mukaffa’, Persian scholar
and Arabic writer, vi, 373 ;
vli, 161

account of, vi, 17

translator of the Bastan-
nama into Arabic, vi, 17
Fables of Bidpai (the

Book of Kalila and
Dimna) into Arabic,
vii, 383
Ibrahim, Abraham _ the
Tiarch, vi, I19, 120
house of =the Kaaba, vi, 119
Ichthyophagi, vi, 81
Sikandar and, vi, 69,
Arrian on, vi, 69
modern accounts of, vi, 70
city of, described, vi, 177
go to meet, and are visited
by, Sikandar, vi, 178
hand over the treasures of
Kai Khusrau to Sikandar,

pat-

147

vi, 178
fd-i-Kurdi, Feast of, i, 143
Ighriras (Aghraératha, Aghré-

rad, Aghriras), brother of
Afrasiyab and Turanian
hero, 142, 1, 92, 337, 342
SeGus 1 135120, 303, 304);
Lil, Ose 130) 206,262
characterised, 1, 55, 338
opposes war with Iran, i,

343
Barman’s single combat,
i, 347
over-ruled by Pashang, i,
344

Afrasiyab, i, 347

franian captives saved by,
i, 363
released by, i, 365 seq.
284 GENERAL INDEX

Ighriras, upbraided and slain by
Afrasiyab, i, 367
Pashang’s grief for, 1, 374
revival of, in legend, iv, 135
given a command, iv 156
head of, sent by Kai Khus-
rau to Kai Kaus, iv, 185
referred to, iv, 267
Tjas bin Kabisa, viii, 188
governor of Hira, viii, 190
{l4, Turanian king, iv, 182
fights with Kai IXKhusrau, iv,
182
Ilyas, ruler of Khazar q.v., 154,
iv, 361
tribute demanded of, by
Ceesar, iv, 352
refuses tribute and declares
war, iv, 352
makes overtures to Gush-
tasp, iv, 354
corpse of, brought by Gush-
tasp to Cesar, iv, 355
Imagery, of Shahnama. See
Shahnama.
Imaus, Greek form of Himalaya
CU Vine
*Inanian, ’Inanians, Arab tribe,
Vi, 324, 339, 331,,.333

Ind. See Hind.
India, 1v,:316); vi, 17, 645,81, 83;
204

franians and Aryans of, i, 15

Palladius on, vi, 61

Ancient, M’Crindle’s, quoted,
vi, 68

= Ethiopia, vi, 68

Indian, Indians, 172, vi, 81, 375,

Eko A A NAb see \eyy aWKoy ey aipubl.
ST,

=Ethiopians, vi, 13, 68

sages, vi, 61, 83, 91 seq., 143
seq., 266

bells and gongs, vi,
viii, 46, 120

bane, vi, 259

king of=Shangul, vii, 118

tongue, vil, I17, 143

sword, falchion, scimitar, viil,
127, UA Say 4 as ele 17

Garden of the, vili, 196

175;

 

Indian, Indians, Faith of, 172,
Vili, 275
ermhoue, 1b:g) 107
Scribewax 07,
Indies, Greek idea of two, vi, 13
duplicate races in, vi, 68

Indo-European race, i, 7

Asiatic branch of, i, 7
Aryans, i, 7
early seats of, i, 7
religion of, i, 7
Indra, Indian god, ii, 25; vi, 203
Vitra and, ai) 25a vile 2zos
Indus river. sine 7 te eee ie oie
LU 7770204523702 5 ave
2085) VignO25107;, Oo mavale
241
mistaken for the Nile, vi, 68
Introduction, to Shahnama, i, 3
Seq.
Tollas, Alexander the Great’s cup-
bearer, vi, 82
fraj, youngest son of Faridun
qg.v. and the protagonist
of the franian race, 140, i,
5A OOM OE2EL : ho aOs
1020; 237.5297, 302); dll).
LV, eA OE Ve 42) ed di ere Ofee
vi, 353; Vil, 73; viii, 266,
376 and note, 392 ; 1X, 103
etymology of, 1, 174
naming of, i, 188
horoscope of, i, 188
receives [ran and Arabia as
his portion, i, 189
abdication of, demanded by
Salm and Tur, i, 192
offers to go to his brothers,
1, 196
visits Salm and Tur, i, 198
reception of, by Salm and
TUG eLOs
offers to resign his kingship
to his brothers, 1, 200
slain by Tur and Salm, i,
201
head of, sent to Faridun, i,
202
mourning for, i, 203 seq.
daughter of, 140, i, 205
married to Pashang, i, 205
GENERAL INDEX 285

fraj, daughter of, gives birth to
Mintchihr, i, 206
vengeance for, i, 215 seq.
referred to, i, 335, 349
fraj, king of Kabul, iv, 146
*Trak, ix, 66
='frak ’Arabi (Babylonia),
Vil. 2045) 224.

Iram, gardens of, i, 100, 113;
i 27o svi 235. sand
note

Tran, 142-144, 146,148, 150, 152-
Teas M50; LO, LOG.
BORN LOG b72) hI. O75)
Omi. CTs 52, 153
and passim

boundaries of, i, 3

physical features of, i, 3

gradual desiccation of, i, 3
and see Drought.

climate of, 1, 4

flora of, i, 4

fauna of, i, 5

land of contrasts, i, 5, 58,
60

cosmogony of, i, 5

people of, i, 6

-vej, region, i, 9
situation of, 1, 9
Zoroaster’s (Zarduhsht’s)

birth-place, i, 62

Arab conquest of, 1, 12

Arabia and, [raj’s portion,
i, 189

-Shahr, ii, 81

fought for by Afrasiyab and
the Arabs, ii, 92

invaded by Suhrab, li, 130

lord of=Mahmid, iv, 142

monarch of=Darab, vi, 21,
26

and Shahnama compared,
vi, 193

invaded by Munzir and
Nu’man, vi, 397

Rum’s tribute to explained,
vii, 187

franian, franians, 144, 147-151,
L5G, 255, HOB 107, 272,
176, i, 9 and passim

neighbours of, i, 9

 

franians, historical relations of,

with Semites, i, Io
Assyrians, i, I0
Pia orale eke Vis X75 cK,
65 seq.
Greeks and Romans, i, 14
Aryans of India, i, 15
Turanians, i, 16 seq.
Kimmerians, 1, 17
Scythians, i, 17
Parthians, i, 18
Alani, i, 19
Huns, i, 19
Turks, i, 20
traditional relations of, with
other Indo - Europeans,
Semites, and Turanians, i,
54, 55, 56
revolt against Jamshid and
summon Zahhak to fran,
i, 139
chiefs of, imprisoned at
Senay st, 3103}
plot for release with Igh-
riras, i, 363
inform Zal, i, 366
teleased by Kishwad, i,
367
provided for by Zal, i,
3607
bewail Naudar, i, 364
wish to withdraw from the
Seven Stages, v, 135
encouraged to persevere by
Asfandiyar, v, 136
provoked to combat by
Zawara, V, 225
Sikandar’s proclamation to,
vi, 44
bewail themselves, vi, 48
counsel Dara to come to
terms with Sikandar, vi,
48
ask quarter of Sikandar, vi,
51
hail Sikandar as ruler, vi, 56
after Yazdagird son of
Shapur’s death meet for
counsel in Pars, vi, 394
Jawanwi sent by, to Mun-
zir, Vi, 397
286

franians, offer prayer at the Fire-

fane of Barzin, vi, 400

loyal, support Bahram Gur,
vi, 402

procedure of,
Shah, vi, 403

decide to reject Bahram
Gur, vi, 403

remonstrated with by Mun-
zir, vi, 403

object-lesson of, to Munzir,
vi, 404

accept Bahram Gur’s pro-
posal for settling the
question of kingship by
ordeal, vi, 406

ask Munzir to

to elect a

intercede

with Bahram Gur _ for
them, vii, 9
arrears of taxes of, can-

celled, vii, II

levied by Bahram Gur, vii,
86

resolve to submit to the
Khan, vii, 87

send Humai as envoy to the
Khan, vii, 87

letter of, tothe Khan, vii, 87

ask for Narsi’s good offices
with Bahram Gur, vii, 93

lament for the death of
Piriz, vii, 169

revolt against Kubad, vii,

195

put Kubad in fetters, vii,
195

ask pardon of Kubad, vii,
200

pardoned by Kubad, vii, 200

take Sakila, vill, 47

chiefs received in audience
by Hurmuzd, viii, 86

consulted by Hurmuzd, viii,

defeat the Khazars, viii, 96
advise Bahram  Chubina,
Vili, 102, I2I, 239 seq., 287
Sawa employs — sorcery
against, vill, 123
encouraged by Bahram
Chubina, vill, 124

 

| frdnian,

GENERAL INDEX

Tranians, defeat the
Turks, viii, 126
revolt against Hurmuzd,
Vili, 156
elect Bahram
Shah, viii, 243
homage Shirwi, ix, 8
choose two chiefs to visit
Khusrau Parwiz in prison,
ix, 9
plot against Guraz, ix, 54
go hunting with Guraz, ix,
ID
race, 1X, 65
enmity of, with Semite,
i, 54; 1X, 65
announces arrival of Shu’ba
Mughira to Rustam, ix, 82
defeat of, at Kadisiya, ix, 84
retreat to Yazdagird, ix, 85
-born, ix, 99
defeat of, at Marv, ix, 116
ambushed, ix, 118
Irma’il and Karma’il, Zahhak’s
cooks, 140, i, 146
Irman, (Arman q.v.), i, 345, 358;
Mi TD 2 sib 2 O24 200.
311
devastated by wild boars,
ill, 290
Irmanians (Armenians q.v.), 150,
lil, 286
complain to Kai Khusrau
of the wild boars, ili, 290
Tron steeds, Sikandar’s, vi, 115
fsa (Jesus), viii, 276 note
Isdigird I (Yazdagird son of
Shaptr), Sdasanian king,
WA gyi

Chubina

| Isdigird IL (Yazdagird son of

Bahram Gur), Sdasanian

king, vii, 153

Ishmael, vi, 65, 120, 121

Iskandar. See Sikandar.
Iskandar, herb, vi, 26
Iskandariya (Alexandria), 160,
vi, 185
Sikandar buried at, vi, 185

| Island, the=Meroe, vi, 65
| Islands, Male and Female, vi, 72

origin of legend of, vi, 72
GENERAL

Isma’il. See Ishmael.
Isma’il, brother of Sultan Mah-
mud, i, 21
TIsnapwi. See Ispanwi.
Ispahan, city in ’Irak-i-’Ajami,
146, i, 351; ii, 394, 399;
i; /50Q’* “Vi; 57, 166, 87;
199; 201, 202; 2105 Vil,
6, 84, 214, 224; viii, 90
given to Gudarz, ii, 78; iv,
129
arrival of Kai Khusrau at,
li, 396
bestowed on Giv by Kai
Khusrau, iv, 298
Ispanwi, slave-girl of Tazhav,
DURA 2 77
taken captive by Bizhan,
iii, 78
Ispurdz, mountain in the neigh-
bourhood of Mazan-
datan,, 11,38, 56; 57,. iv;
136, 230
Israfil, archangel, 160, vi, 78
Sikandar’s interview with,
PV1,) 63,) LOL
Issedones, tribe situated on the
Tarim basin in eastern
Turkistan, ili, 192
Issus, town, plain, and gulf in
Cilicia, vi, 30
battle of, vi, 30, 31
Darius’ family taken pris-
oners at, vi; 31
Istakhr (Persepolis), city in Pars,
EAB eLO Ss le Uta 225 25,
339; Vi, 57, 198, 199,
202-2 tine 2 eens 280.
326), 350) 9350> vil, 83;
O5) .1S8oc%) Ville 7900,, 313.5
ix, 50, 54
buildings at, attributed to
Humai, v, 293
Dara marches from, to en-
counter Sikandar, vi, 37,
40
returns to, vi, 44
Sikandar crowned Shah at,
vi, 59
taken by Ardshir Papakan,

Vi, 22

INDEX 2&7

Istakhr, Ardshir Papakan
marches from, against the
Kurds, vi, 230
returns victorious to, vi,

232
Yazdagird taken to, ix, 64
made Shah at, ix, 65
Istuvegu. See Astyages.
Italy, vii, 218
Alexander of Epirus’ ex-
pedition to, vi, 12

Alexander the  Great’s
legendary expedition to,
vi, 12, 30

| [wan-i-Kerkh, vi, 327
| Izads (Yazatas), the, iii, 286

 

{zid, viii, 75
fzid Gashasp, archscribe, 170,
viii, 74
confusion in name of, viii,
75, 76
put to death by Hurmuzd,
vili, 75, 83
malicious speech of, vill, 77
and note, 150 and note
imprisoned, viii, 81
sends for high priest, vii, 81
{zid Gashasp, [ranian warrior,
Vill elOSse 22) L300 538)
149, 350, 353, 350
conducts spoil to fran, viii,
148
goes hunting with Bahram
Chubina, viii, 156
speech of, vili, 165

yj

| JABALA BIN SALIM, viii, 73

Jacob of Sartg, Syriac poet.
Syriac Christian Legend
of Alexander the Great
versified by, vi, 15, 74, 78,
84

| Jadustan, vi, 109 and note

Jagatai, mountain-range in
Khurasan, v, 29

Jahn, son of Afrasiyab, Turan-
ian hero, 152, i, 92; Ul,
264, 268; iv, 156, 162,
200 seq., 214
288

Jahn, son of Afrasiyab, sent to
guard Shida’s rear, iv, 155

advances to the attack
and is defeated by Karan,
iv, 178

stationed at the centre with
Afrasiyab, iv, 179

sent to the left with troops,
iv, 180

Garsiwaz and, compel Afra-
siyab to quit the field, iv,

182
commands the right, iv,
190
helps to defend Gang-

bihisht, iv, 209
taken prisoner by Rustam,

iv, 210
sent to Kai Kaus, iv,
233
interned by Kai Kaus, iv,
235
spurious passage about, iv,
272 note
Jahn, architect of throne of
Takhdis, vili, 391
Jahram (Chahram), 167, 163,

city in Pars, vi, 44, 119,
202) 225, 2357 240208,
A400)? “Wil, L555 Ux, 29) OL
Dara goes to, vi, 44
desert of, vi, 401
Jaj (? Chach q.v.), iv, 150
Jalalpur, city in the northern
Punjab, vi, 18
Jalula, town north-east of Bagh-
dadeei,, 125 1x06
battle of, 1, 12, 1x68
Jam, son of Kubad and brother
of Nushirwan, vii, 316
conspires against Nushir-
wan, vii, 316
Jamasp, chief minister of Shah
Gushtasp, 155, i, 42; li, 9; Vv,
E25 9225 (2A MSCG.3e 50,200,
PAS, Cys} 8 Ninubi, aey/i1.. eie}}
x20
omniscience of, v, 19, 48
answers, in conjunction with
Zarir and Asfandiyar, Ar-
jasp’s letter, v, 42

GENERAL

 

INDEX

| Jamasp, foretells the death in

battle of Ardshir, v, 49
Shidasp, v, 50
Girami, v, 50
exploits of Nastur, v, 50
death of Nivzar, v, 51
Zarir, v, 52, 70 note
triumph of Asfandiyar, v,
52
defeat of Arjasp, v, 52
encourages Gushtdsp
fight, v, 54
referred to, v, 59, 102
dissuades Gushtasp from
avenging Zarir, v, 64, 68
made archmage of Fire-
temple built by Gush-
tasp, v, 75
sent to recall Asfandiyar to
court, v, 80 seq.
advises Gushtasp, when be-
leaguered by Arjasp, to
release Asfandiyar, v, 97
volunteers to go to Asfan-
diyar, v, 97
reaches Gumbadan in dis-
guise, v, 98
interview of, with Asfan-
diyar, v, 99 seq.
sends for blacksmiths to
unchain Asfandiyar,v, 101
sets off with Asfandiyar,
Bahman, and Nish Azar,
v, 103
foretells Asfandiyar’s fate,
v, 169
reproached by Bishutan, v,
254
advises Gushtasp to write
to Bahman, v, 257
writes by Gushtasp’s orders
to recall Bahman, v, 258
Gushtasp tells his intention
as to the succession to, v,
279
prophecy of, viii, 68
additions of, to throne of
Takhdis, viii, 392
Jamasp, son of Piruz, 166, vi, 3
supersedes Kubad temporar-
ily, vii, 184, 195

to
; GENERAL INDEX

Jamasp, son of Piruz, title of,
vii, 186
fate of, vii, 186, 200
James, St., bishop of Edessa, i,

374

James V of Scotland, vii, 3

Bahram Gur’s resemblance

to, vil, 3

Jamhur, king of Hind, vii, 395,
396, 398, 399, 401, 403

Jamshid, son of Tahmuras, Shah
and culture-hero, 140, 164,
E428 90,, 9b, pil, 4,, 33,
37, 168, 204, 358, 399;
Ml, 7, 57, 257, 273; lV,
63, 2033. 0249)203, 200;
BI 227A e207 Va, 32) 34;
Bo AVatoO 202), 215 12 TO:
2A Gn ee eee2Oq me Va 4i5
and mote, 172, 209; vii,
BGiseq=, 107, 162,173,211 ;

Sill meee UO ZOO uES TO:
332, 341, 387; 1x, 25, 39,
103

Reign of, 140, i, 129 seq.
Note on, 15 129) seq:

the [ranian Noah, i, 129

meaning of, i, 130

ascends the throne, i, 131

greatness of, i, 131

culture-hero, i, 132

makes armour, i, 132
raiment, i, 132

institutes castes, i, 132

great builder, i, 133

introduces jewelry and per-

fumes, 1, 133

leechcraft, i, 133
ship-building, i, 133

carried by the divs into the
air, i, 133

feast held in memorial of, i,

134
fall of, i, 130, 134, 139
franians revolt against, i, 139
flight and death of, i, 139
sisters of, married to Zah-

hak, i, 146

found by Faridun, 140, i,

162
referred to, iv, 304

VOL. /1X-

| Jats,

 

289

Jamshid, treasure of, found by
Bahram Gur, 264, vii, 36
described, vii, 36

Jandal, envoy of Faridin, ro,
i, 177

asks Sarv’s daughters in
marriage for Faridun’s
sons, 1, 178

informs Fariduin of the out-
come of his mission, i, 182

Jandal, city in Hind, vii, 140

monarch of, entertained by

Bahram Gur, vii, 140
seq.

Janfurtz, franian general, viii,
297

Janusiyar, minister of Dara, vi,
2, 88

murders Dara, vi, 52
informs Sikandar of Darda’s
murder, vi, 52
arrested by Sikandar, vi, 53
executed, vi, 56, 88
Jaranjas, Turanian hero, iv, 156
Jarira, daughter of Piran, wife
of Siyawush, and mother
Of Banids 47-992) 15

3; ul, 43

married to Siyawush, i,
268 seq.

birth of her son Fardd, ii,
291

referred to, iii, 39
advises Farud, iii, 42
dream of, ili, 63
kills herself, ili, 66
Jarmana, place, ix, 93
Jasha, king, i, 67, 68
Jatakas, vii, 383
people of north-western
India, vii, 6
fabulous origin of, vii, 6
Jawanwi, Tranian magnate, vi,
373 Falls OO
goes as ambassador to Mun-
zir, vi, 398
interview of, with Munzir,
vi, 398 seq.
recognises the divine Grace
in Bahram Gur, vi, 398
seq.
T
290

Jawanwi, suggests a course of
action to Munzir, vi, 400
returns to [ran, vi, 400
bidden by Bahram Gur to
remit the arrears of taxes,
vil, II
Jaz (Gaz), town north-west of
Ispahan, vi, 337; vii, 76,
79, 80
tribute of, remitted, vii, 82
Jerusalem, v, 306 note, vi, 81;
vill, I9I, 196
Elevation of the True Cross
at, ix, 43
GSUS)) 15042); Vall er ON ses LO
sayings of, vili, 276 and note
Cross of, vili, 380
laughter of, viii, 191, 380
Jew, Jews, 768, vi, 356; vii, 13,
2735-5 Ville 20,07, (270
Faith of, vi, 95
Bahram Gutr’s adventure
with a, vii, 16 seq.
persecution of, vii, 153
Zuran’s plot with a, against
Mahbud, vii, 320 seq.
bewitches Nushirwan’s food,
Vii, 321
makes confession to Nushir-
wan, vil, 325
Fables of Bidpai, vogue of
largely due to, vii, 383
Jewelled tree, Kai Khusrau’s, iii,
329
Jeweller, a, 764. See Mahiyar.
daughter of, 164
Jewels, discovery of, i, 133
Palace of, r60
Jhilam (Hydaspes), river in the
Punjab, vi, 18, 31, 63
Jihtin (Oxus q.v.) river, 146, 152,
1; 215, 219,-345; 3753.1,
15,19 Seq., 99, 229, 237,248,
258, 311, 340, 390, 394,
399, 404; iii, 58, 159;
IV, LO; 12; 20; 53; 00; 79;
153, 154, 157, 181, 184,
187, 194, 255, 304; V, 12,
29, 40, 45, 48, 203; vii,
2) T05;. 166, 1d0,) 320;
338, 340; viii, 94 99,

GENERAL

 

| Julian

 

INDEX

Jihun—cont.
134, 174, 332 5 1X, 77, 115,
118
boundary between fran and
Turan i, 71, 370, 371
confused with the Aras, i,
379
fords of, vili, 331
Jins, ix, 81
Johari Das, Babu, quoted, vi, 81
Joktan, vi, 65
=Kahtan, vi, 65
Joshua, vi, 77
Moses and, Muhammadan
legend of, vi, 77

Jovian (Bazantish), Roman Em-

peror (A.D. 363-4), vi,

324 seq.; Vili, 41
confused with Valerian, vi,
324

Judaism, vi, 327

| Judda, the port of Mecca, 159,

Ville eT2ie
Sikandar arrives at, vi, I21

(Yants), Roman Em-
peror (A.D. 361-363), i,
T2GA Vie s25
confused with Valerian, vi,

324
not an emperor in the Shah-

nama, vi, 324, 326
expedition of, against Per-
sla, vi, 324 seq.

Valerius, early Latin
translator of the Pseudo-
Callisthenes, vi, 14, 61,
Be seq., 71, 74, 78, 79,

I
Jund-i-Shaptr (Gund-i-Shapur

q.v.), city, vi, 256
=Ras-Shapur, vi, 256
foundation of attributed to

Ardshir Papakan, vi, 266

Julius

| Jupiter, planet, i, 72, 161, 188,

2STe eis Disc) slips Mion
iV, L433/295. 3. V5. 2505 vas
038, 9272.5 202 5 Vilage
248 3575 Vill; 20 ey2.
157, 395

Justin I, Eastern Roman Em-
peror, vii, 316
GENERAL INDEX 2y1

Justin II, Eastern Roman Em-
peror, vii, 212; vili, 41
Justinian, Eastern Roman Em-
DELOL, 1710 5) Vil, 212, 20g,

Bie Vill, AT

silkworm introduced into
the West during reign of,
vi, 20

bargains of, with Nushirwan,
vil, 214, 216 seq.

protection of MHarith bin
Jabala by, leads to war
with Nushirwan, vii, 217

successes of, in the West,
Vil, 217

closes the schools of Athens,
Vili, 280

Juya, a div, ii, 71
slain by Rustam, ii, 72

K

KAABA, the, 159, vi, 65
account of, vi, 65
Sikandar’s expedition to,
Vi; 67,83, E19
Kabab, small pieces of meat
skewered together for
roasting, li, 103; ili, 69;
ives DO suey 52s evil 250
Kabisa, viii, 188
Kabttn, king of Misr and the
progenitor of the Copts,
vi, I21
welcomes Sikandar, vi, 121
praises Kaidafa to Sikandar,
vi, 122
Kabtda, 147, one of Afrasiyab’s
herdsmen, iii, 73
slain by Bahram, iii, 74
Kabul, Kabulistan (Afghanis-
tan), city and country,
TAT cla Gl eA aey ea ZOR,
2585. 277. (2a2 203) 250;
294, 298, 299 note, 300,
302 seg., 316, 357, 378;
i; 12,2056; 21. 92) 225, 260,
271, 341; ili, 17, 35, 145,
153, 165, 174, 186, 190,
202, 206, 321; iv, 14, 65,

Kabul—cont.
TAO; 278,203, 292; Vv;
126; 170, 273, 224, 242,
251, 260, 263 seq., 271,
PIR SEg.. (204207 5, Vi,
207.3) Vile 275
Buddhism in, i, 15
superseded by Brahman-
ism, i, 16
dagger of, i, 219; vi, 320
Zal visits, 1, 256
Beauty of = Rudaba, i,
262, 316
monarch of =Mihrab, i, 294,
395
rejoicings at, over Zal’s
successful embassy to
Mintchihr, i, 314
preparations at, to welcome
Sam and Zal, i, 315
falchion of, 1, 376; ix, 98
Shaghad sent to be brought
up at, v, 264
king of, 157, v, 264, 271
daughter of, marries Sha-
ghad, v, 264
Shaghad and, plot against
Rustam, v, 265 seq.
gives a feast, v, 266
pretends to quarrel with

Shaghad, v, 266
treachery of, v, 268 seq.
abases himself before

Rustam, v, 269
entertains Rustam and in-
vites him to hunt, v,
269
hypocrisy of, v, 271
Faramarz sent against, v,
274, 276
defeated and put to death
with all his kin, v, 277
tribute of, question about,
v, 265
Faramarz makes a Zabuli
king of, v, 277
monarch of, entertained by
Bahram Gur, vii, 140 seq.

| Kachar Bashi, city in Turan, u,

258, 360, 361; vii, 330,
358; ix, 117
292

Kadisi, Kadisiya, town on one
of the canals west of the
Euphrates and south of
Mashad ’Ali (Nedjef), vi,

ELQ;) 39Ou; (LK, oa 755: 745
Tle

battlevofeniher2 4/3) -seixans
67, 69

dateiof, 167
canal of, ix, 69
Rustam advances to, ix, 73

Kaékasta (Urumiah q.v.), lake,
lve eS 7,
Kaf, mythical Mount Alburz

G20., 1) 63) A045 Nv, 65;
149; vill, 66 and note
Kafur, king of Bidad, r49, ili, 191
worsts the [rdnians, iii, 244
slain by Rustam, iii, 245
Kahtan, desert of, i, 287
Kahtan, the Arabic form of
Joktan, the progenitor of
the southern Arabs, vi,
65, 120
Kai, meaning of, ii, 8
Kaian, Kaianian (see Kai), ii, 8,
9, 404; lil, 5 seg., 9,
14, 43, 67, 112, 147, 307,
3S, 820) S2onmg42)4 aly,

DD

“s,

5 Seq., 24, 33, 35, 5, 110,
127,050, LOO; i755 2345
260; 2027269) 2735 270;
285, 286, 289, 293, 308,
ZLO} S2ANs Va FeSCIR LO,

47, 49, 52, 54, 57, 59, 60,
67 seq., 73 Seq., 79, 86, 91,
OF) 122, SLOSN 2038 270;
2227) 2oS5 2A 2o2) Zoo;
289,020E, 3iles avienO) Seqes

17, 34, 48, 55, 57, 59, 81,

D2 el 4G) LO OO;
194, 199, 200, 202, 210,
223, 237 note; vili, 65,
216

dynasty, i, 49, 373; ii, 7
SEG a ile eeye SCOR ee vain

Ség.; V, 7 Seq. 5 Vi, 9Seq-
genealogical table, ii, 3
birth-mark, ii, 372
stature, li, 375
saying, iv, 33

|

 

Kaianush (Kataitn), brother of

GENERAL INDEX

Kaian, throne, viii, 214
race, viii, 217
crown, ix, II, 105
Faridin, i, 90, 91, 158
V., 201
referred to, i, 147, 165
Purmaya and, summon the
smiths to Faridun, i, 158
go with Fariduin against
Zahhak, i, 159
attempt to kill Faridun, i,

160

Kai Arash, son of Kai Kubdad,
ie Bye) Dovin WOR Ail
LOZ, 201.228) eval, 26

Kai Armin, son of Kai Kubad,
LIS he28
Kaid, Indian king, 759, Z61, i,

55 G0 Vi, Ol, mO3\ Ol eseqe
112
identical with Mandanes

(Dandamis), vi, 62
consults Mihran about his
dreams, vi, 92 seq.
dreams of, interpreted by
Mihran, vi, 94, seq.
Four Wonders of, 159, Vi,
94, 97 and note, 99 seq.
daughter, 759, vi, 94, 100,
102, 104
described, vi, 100, 102,
10
married to Sikandar, vi,
104
reference in Sikandar’s
Will to, vi, 182

cup, described, vi, 94,
100
principle of, explained,
vil, 109

leech, vi, 94, 101
prescribes for Sikandar,
vi, 107
sage, vi, 94, IOI
=Calanus, vi, 62
Sikandar’s encounter of
wits with, vi, 62, 104
Seq.
explains the principle of
the cup, vi, 109
GENERAL INDEX 293

Kxaid, sends his Four Wonders , Kaidrush, wife of, vi, 66

and other gifts to Si-
kandar, vi, 103

revival of, in legend, vi, 256,
266

prophecy of, vi, 256, 257, 267

consulted by Ardshir Papa-
kan, vi, 266

advice of, to Ardshir Papa-
kan, vi, 267, 273

taken with his wife, by
Sikandar, vi, 125

brought with his wife before
Naitkin, vi, 126

sentenced with his wife to
death, vi, 126

pardoned with his wife, vi,
126

gratitude of, vi, 127

Kaidafa (Cilicia), vi, 294, 297 returns to Kaidafa, vi, 127

Kaidafa (Kandake, Candace q.v.), presents Naitkin (Sikan-
159, vi, 83, I2I seq., 325 | dar) to Kaidafa, vi, 127
obtains Sikandar’s portrait, | Kaihan. See Kaid.

Ixai Kats, son of Kai Kubad and

 

vi, 122

praised by Kabttn to Sikan-
dar, vi, 122

receives a_ letter
Sikandar, vi, 123

answers Sikandar’s letter, vi,
123

welcomes Kaidrish on his
return from captivity, vi,
127

receives Naitkun (Sikandar)
graciously, vi, 128

state of, described, vi, 128,
130, 133

gives audiences to Naitkun
(Sikandar), vi, 128 seq.

recognises Sikandar, vi, 129

from

seq.

hears Sikandar’s embassage,
vi, 129

covenants of, with Sikandar,
Wi, 1825 139

warns Sikandar against

Tainush, vi, 133
chides Tainush, vi, 135
takes counsel with Sikandar
about Tainush, vi, 135
approves of  Sikandar’s
scheme, vi, 137
takes counsel
nobles, vi, 139
gifts of, to Sikandar, vi, 140
Sikandar’s final message to,
v1, 143

Kaidriish (Kkandaros, Candaules),

son of Kaidafa (Candace),
vi, 134, 135

 

with her

Shah, 143-147, 152, 153,
IV AZ S3Os alle Sono seq. 23
S€q., 33 S€q., 54 Seq., 61
SCG. # LOO; -LLO, 1275) 130;
233) 243) Seg-, 204, 269
Seq., 273, 284, 286, 290,
296, 301, 316, 318, 319,
335, 347; 361, 364; 371,
372, 383, 401; iii, 7, 9,
13, 14, 20 séq., 24, 30, 45,
51, 84, 85, 88, 90, 93, 96,
113,145,147, 166, 174, 236,
238, 239, 289, 307, 327;
LVnlSs OL r20) 35) 130;
OZ G7 NSEq. paLOb 1 Ol:
£99; 20K, 203, 217; 218;
232 Seq., 254, 256 seq., 269
seq., 278, 287, 289, 290,
292, 295 seq., 306, 310,
Bi4les2k Segasn V,129, 30;
TIO 7s 74; .290,71 203;
207, 205, 210.205, 250.
VAT Ame LO /en aS s enya
22, 104, 168, 270, 341 ; ix,
25

Reign of, 143, li, 25 seq.
Notes on, ul, 25 seq., 79
seq., 118, 188 seq., 335

visits Rustam, li, 83

tempted by divs, ii, 30 seq.,
82, 102 seq.

goes to Mount Kaf, ii, 83

defeats Afrasiyab and _ re-
gains [ran, ii, 100

makes Rustam paladin of
paladins, ii, 101
294

Kai

GENERAL INDEX

Kats, buildings of, on
Mount Alburz, li, 81, ror

flying-machine of, ii, 103

fall of, from the sky, li, 104 ¢
v, 174

repentance of, li, 105

hears of Suhrab and sum-
mons his chiefs, ii, 136
Seq.

bids Tus hang Rustam and
Giv, ii, 143

apology of, to Rustam, ii,
147

encampment of, described,
i, 53
overthrown by Suhrab, ii,

160

refuses to cure Suhrab, ii,
178

attempts to console Rustam,
i, 182

marries the future mother of
Siyawush, li, 194

receives Siyawush at court,
li, 198

bestows Kuhistanupon Siy4-
wush, ii, 199

conduct of, in the case of
Siyawush and Sudaba, ii,
200 seq.

sends Siyawush to fight
Afrasiyab, li, 225

rejects terms of peace and
quarrels with Rustam, ii,
244 seq.

hears of the defection of
Siyawush, ii, 258

grief of, at the death of
Siyawush, ii, 337

hears of Kai JKhusrau’s
arrival in fran, ii, 395

receives Kai Khusrau, ii,
397

rewards Giv, ii, 399

provides for Farangis, ii,

399

arbitrates between Tus and
Gudarz, li, 403 seq.

welcomes Kai Khusrau on
his return from the
castle of Bahman, li, 410

Kai Kats, requires Kai Khus-

rau to swear vengeance
on Afrasiyab, iii, 21
welcomes Giv and_ hears
his tidings of Kai Khus-
rau, iv, 234
gives a feast, iv, 234
deals with the captives, iv,
235
proclaims the conquest of
Turan and Chin, iv, 236
rewards Giv, iv, 236
sends Giv back with letter
to Kai Khusrau, iv, 238
hears that Kai Khusrau is
returning and goes with
the nobles to welcome
him, iv, 256
receives gifts from, and hears
the adventures of, Kai
Khusrau, iv, 257
gives a feast in honour of
Kai Khusrau, iv, 257
counsels a pilgrimage to the
temple of Azargashasp,
lv, 258
Kkai Khusrau and, hear from
Gudarz of Huim’s adven-
ture with Afrasiyab, iv,
204
send for Garsiwaz and
put him to the torture,
iv, 265 ;
make thanksgiving before
Azargashasp, iv, 269
go in state to the temple
of Azargashasp, iv, 270
prays that he may die, iv,
270

‘ obsequies of, iv, 271

treasure of, called ‘‘ The
Bride’ bestowed by Kai
Khusrau on Giv, Zal, and
Rustam, iv, 295

favour shown by Luhrasp
to the grandsons of, iv,
318, 321 seq.

grandsons of, go with Zarir
to Rim, iv, 360
hail Gushtasp as Shah, iv,

362
GENERAL INDEX 295

Kats, Rustam’s
from, v, 203

patent

Kai Khusrau, son of Siyawush

and Farangis, Shah, 146-
Dia TOO, 4, A422°369) eis
3, 9, 25, 104, 189, 190, 334
seq., 386 seq. ; iii, 13 seq.,
47, 55, 57, 66, 106, 108,
PDE. S6Ge, 132, 034, Loo;
173, 175, 186, I91, 197,
198, 202, 205, 211, 226,
228, 238 seq., 249, 250,
27Is 277 ZO ZOO) 20:
294 seg., 326 seq., 338,
353 Sg.5 1V, 7.Seg., 19, 21,
30, 31, 36, 56 seq., 05, 66,
71, 72, 76 seq., 90, 99,
PER TAdyseg., 152, £53;
237 Séq., 262, 267 seq.,
SUF Sed, 319; 3205 Vv, 10;
220s 30) 1735. 185, 203;
204, 208, 215, 284, 289;
V7 sele7 7 VALS eT 20% L735
359; viii, 148, 219, 270,
332, 392; 1x, 25, 103
fravashi of, ii, 82
identical with Cyrus the
Great in legend, li, 9, 190
prophesies respecting, li, 310,
372, 390
birth of, ii, 325 seq.
account of youth of, ii,
328 seq.
questioned by Afrasiyab, ii,
332
dwells at Siyawushgird, ii,
333
sent to Khutan, ii, 356
Machin, ii, 357 note
described by Surush, ii, 363
Gudarz sends Giv to seek,
li, 364 seq.
recalled, li, 370
found by Giy, ii, 370
birth-mark of, ii,
49 nole
saves Piran’s life, ii, 387
at the Jihtn, ii, 391 seq.
arrives at Zam, ll, 394
visits Giidarz at Ispahan,
li, 396

372, ili,

Kai Khusrau, tells his story to

Kai Kats, ii, 397
praises Giv to Kai Kats, ii,
398
goes to Istakhr, ti, 399
enthroned as Shah, ii, 400,
411
supported by Gudarz and
opposed by Tus, ii, 400
seq.
letter of, to the defenders of
the castle of Bahman, ii,
497
establishes Fire-worship at
the castle of Bahman, ii,
499
pardons Tus, ii, 410
Reign of, 147, ill, 7 seq.
Notes on, iii, 7 seq., 108,
IQI, 271, 285 seq.; iv,
7, 135 Seq.
last link with the Vedas,
il, 7
longest in respect of sub-
ject matter in the poem,
fiieee7
divisions of, iii, 7
episodes of, ili, 7
warlike character of, ili,
8
subject-matter of, iii, 8
accession of, iil, 17
goes on a hunting expedi-
tion, li, 19
to the temple of Azar-
gashasp, ili, 20
swears to take vengeance on
Afrasiyab, ili, 21
prepares for war, Ui, 23
seq.
offers reward for the head
of Palashan, ili, 26
crown of Tazhav, iii, 2
slave of Tazhav, iii, 2
head of Tazhav, ili, 28
burning the barricade at
the Kdsa riid, ili, 28
going on an embassage to
Afrasiyab, ili, 29
warns Tus to avoid Kalat,
ili, 39
296

Kai

GENERAL INDEX

Khusrau, hears of the death
of Farud and of the defeat
of the franians, iii, 84

wrath of, with Tus, ii, 84
Seq, ella

writes to Fariburz, iii, 84

disgraces Tus, iii, 86

imprisons Tus, ili, 87

pardons Tus and the fran-
jams, ill, 114

hears of the peril of the
franians on Mount Hama-
wan and summons Rus-
tam, ili, 142 seq.

sends Rustam to succour
the [ranians, iii, 145

furthers the suit of Fari-

burz to Farangis, iii,
147

hears of Rustam’s victory,
ili, 239

disposes of the captives and
spoil, ili, 240

sends gifts to Rustam and
the host, iii, 241

goes to meet Rustam on his
return in triumph, iii,
267

gives a feast to the chiefs,
ili, 208

rewards Rustam, iii, 269

holds a court and hears of
the doings of the div
Akwan, ll, 273

writes to summon Rustam,
AID

goes to welcome Rustam on
his return from slaying
the div Akwan, iil, 282

rewards Rustam, iii, 283

hears at a feast of the case
of the Irmanians, iii, 289

calls for volunteers, lll, 291

sends Bizhan and Gurgin to
Irman, ili, 292

comforts Giv for the loss
of Bizhan, iii, 315, 318

imprisons Gurgin, lili, 317

promises Giv to consult the
divining-cup about Biz-
han, ili, 317

 

Kai Khusrau sends Giv to sum-

mon Rustam, iii, 319

sends the host to mect
Rustam, ili, 327

welcomes Rustam, ili, 328

jewelled tree of, ili, 329

requests Rustam to rescue
Bizhan, ili, 330

releases Gurgin at Rustam’s
request, ili, 333

equips Rustam for his quest
of Bizhan, iii, 333

welcomes Rustam on _ his
return, ili, 354

rewards Rustam and his
comrades, ili, 356

holds converse with Bizhan,
iii, 356

gives gifts to Manizha, iii,
356

hears that the Turanians
are invading fran, iv, 12

summons his paladins, iv, 13

host, iv, 14
sends Rustam to Hindustan,
iv, 14
Luhrasp to the Alans,
iv, 14
Ashkash to Kharazm, iv,
15

Gudarz to Turan, iv, 15

orders Gudarz to negotiate
with Piran, iv, 15

receives letter from Gudarz,
iv, 58

rewards Hajir, the bearer,
iv, 58

prays for victory, iv, 58

sends Hajir with answer,
iv, 61

leads a host to aid Gutdarz,
lv, 62

referred to, iv, 85

presage of, that Piran would
be slain by Gudarz, iv, 85,
88

reaches Gudarz, iv, I11, 126

receives Gtdarz and _ the
other champions, iv, 126

Gurwi brought by Giv
before, iv, 127
 

Iai

GENERAL INDEX

Khusrau, laments
Piran, iv, 127
buries Piran and the Tuir-
anian champions, iv, 128
puts Gurwi to death, iv, 129
rewards the host, iv, 129
gives Ispahan to Gudarz,
iv, 129

pardons the Turanian host,
iv, 131

amulet of, iv, 133

heals Gustaham, iv, 133

summons reinforcements,
Iv, 134, 145

Great War of, with Afrasiyab,
I52, iv, 135 seq.

exemption of, from death,

over

iv, 138
recalls the troops under
Luhrasp, Rustam, and

Ashkasb, iv, 145

stations Tus on his right
with Kawa’s standard, iv,
146

gives the right wing to Rus-
tam, iv, 147
left wing to Gudarz, iv,
147
commands to various

chiefs, iv, 148, 149

hears of Afrasiyab’s passage
of the Jihun, iv, 157

sends troops to the aid of
Gustaham, son of Nau-
dar, at Balkh, iv, 157
Ashkash with a host to

Zam, iv, 157

marches to Kharazm, iv, 157

surveys the seat of war and
entrenches the host, iv,
157

Shida’s embassage to, iv, 161

sends Karan to welcome
Shida, iv, 165

proposes to fight in single
combat, iv, 166

rejects the T[ranians’ sug-
gestions of a peace, iv,
167

accepts Shida’s challenge,
iv, 168, 169

 

297

IKXai Khusrau, sends Karan with

a reply to Shida, iv, 168
arms to fight with Shida,
Lye, 17
makes Ruhham his stand-

ard-bearer, iv, 171
sends instructions to the
host, iv, I71

parley of, with Shida, iv,
172

accepts Shida’s challenge
to a wrestling-bout, iv,
175

gives Ruhham charge of his
steed, iv, 175

wrestles and
Shida, iv, 175

instructs Ruhham to bury
Shida, iv, 176

spares the life of Shida’s
interpreter and bids him
return to Afrasiyab with
tidings, iv, 176

prays for vengeance on, and
attacks, Afrasiyab, iv, 178

bids Shammakh attack, iv,
180

attacks with Rustam from
the centre, iv, 180

fights with Ustukila, [a and
Burztyala, iv, 182

returns to camp, iv, 183

hears of Afrasiyab’s retreat,
iv, 184

offers praise to God, iv, 184

pursues Afrasiyab, iv, 185
seq.

marches to Sughd, iv, 188

hears tidings of Afrasiyab,
iv, 188

sends Gustaham, son _ of
Naudar, to Chach, iv, 188
Rustam to encounter

Tawurg, iv, 188

marches from Sughd and
reduces the Turkman
strongholds, iv, 189
to the Gulzaryun, iv, 189

commands the centre, iv,
19!

prays for victory, iv, 191

overthrows
GENERAL

Kai Khusrau, hears of the defeat

of Kurakhan by Gusta-
ham, son of Naudar, iv,
193

hears of Rustam’s defeat
of Tawurg, iv, 193

warns Rustam to beware of
Afrasiyab, iv, 194

plunders the camp of, and

pursues, Afrasiyab, iv,
195
besieges Gang-bihisht, iv,

198, 208 seq.

converses with Rustam, iv,
198, 199, 222

receives Jahn in audience,
iv, 200

declines Afrasiyab’s  pro-
posals for peace, iv, 207

with Rustam, Gustaham
son of Naudar, and Gu-
darz, assails Gang-bihisht
on all sides, iv, 208 seq.

prays for victory, iv, 208

takes Gang-bihisht by storm,
iv, 209 seq.

searches vainly
siyab, iv, 212

gives the spoil of Gang-
bihisht to the troops, iv,
217

grants quarter to the Turk-
mans and assumes the
government of Turan, iv,
21

dwells for a while at Gang-
bihisht, iv, 218

leaves Guidarz and Farhad
at Gang-bihisht, iv, 219

marches against Afrasiyab,
lv, 220

rejects Afrasiyab’s over-
tures, iv, 223

fight a general engagement
against Afrasiyab, iv, 223,
220

entrenches his troops and
prepares with Tus and
Rustam for a night-at-
tack from Afrasiyab, iv,
224

for Afra-

 

Kkai Khusrau, repulses

INDEX

Afrasi-
yab’s night-attack, iv, 225

defeats Afrasiyab, iv, 22

receives the submission of
Afrasiyab’s army, iv, 228

gives a feast, iv, 228

offers praise to God, iv, 228

returns to Gang-bihisht, iv,
228

accepts the submission of the
Khan and Faghfur, iv, 229

resolves to pursue Afra-
siyab to Gang-dizh, iv,
231

plan of, opposed by the host,
LVeN 230
supported by Rustam, iv,

231
agreed to by the host, iv,
232

sends Giv with Afrasiyab’s
captive kindred to Kai
Kaus, iv, 232 seq.

leaves Gustaham, son of
Naudar, in command at
Gang-bihisht and marches
to Chin, iv, 238

demands facilities from the
Khan, the Faghfur, and
the king of Makran, iv,
238

marches through Khutan,
iv, 240

welcomed by the Faghfutr
and the Khan of Chin, iv,
240

stays three months in Chin,
iv, 241

leaves Rustam in Chin and
marches to Makran, iv,
241

sends an embassy to the
king of Makran, iv, 241

gives honourable burial to
the king of Makran, iv,

243

stops the pillage of Makran,
lv, 243

stays a year in Makran, iv,
244

makes ready a fleet, iv, 244
GENERAL INDEX 299

Kai Khusrau, leaves Ashkash as | Kai Khusrau, prays for satis-

governor and marches to
the desert, iv, 244

voyage of, iv, 245
wonders of, iv, 245

lands, iv, 246

appoints Giv governor, iv,
246

receives the submission of
the chiefs, iv, 247

seeks for tidings of Gang-
dizh and of Afrasiyab, iv,
247

marches to Gang-dizh, iv,
247

forbids his troops to injure
Gang-dizh, iv, 247

enters Gang-dizh, iv, 248

searches for Afrasiyab, iv,
248

remains a year at Gang-dizh,
iv, 249

urged by his paladins to
return to [ran, iv, 249

appoints a governor for
Gang-dizh, iv, 249

distributes treasures at
Gang-dizh, iv, 250

marches seaward from Gang-
dizh, iv, 250

welcomed by Giv, iv, 250

crosses the sea to Makran,
iv, 251

welcomed in Makran by Ash-
kash and the chiefs, iv,
251

appoints a’ governor for
Makran, iv, 251

marches to Chin, iv, 251

welcomed by Rustam, iv,
251

confirms the Faghftir and
Khan in the possession of
Machin and Chin, iv, 252

goes with Rustam to Siya-
wushgird, iv, 252

rewards Rustam and Giv,
lv, 252

welcomed by Gustaham, son
of Naudar, iv, 252

goes to Gang-bihisht, iv, 253

 

faction on Afrasiyab, iv,
253

dwells for a year in Gang-
bihisht, iv, 254

desires to return to Kai
Kaus, iv, 254

leaves Gustaham, son of
Naudar, as viceroy, iv,
254

carries off treasure from
Chin and Makran, iv, 254

arrives at Chach, iv, 255
Sughd, iv, 255

met by Khtizan and Tali-
man, iv, 255

makes offerings to the Fire-
temple at Bukhara, iv,
255

crosses the Jihun, iv, 255

arrives at Balkh, iv, 255

welcomed everywhere by
the people, iv, 255

goes by Talikan, the Marv-
rud, Nishapur, and Dam-
aghan to Rai, iv, 255

stays two weeks at Rai, iv,
256

announces his approach to
Kai Kaus, iv, 256

goes to Baghdad and thence
to Pars, iv, 256

reception of, by Kai Kaus,
iv, 256

presents gifts, and tells his
adventures, to Kai Kaus,
iv, 257

has a feast given in his
honour by Kai Kaus, iv,
257

rewards the troops, iv, 258

takes counsel with Kai Kaus
concerning Afrasiyab, iv,
258

goes with Kai Kaus on a pil-
grimage to the temple of
Azargashasp, iv,~258

Kai Kats and, hear from
Guidarz of Him’s adven-
ture with Afrasiyab, iv,
204
300

GENERAL

Kkai Khusrau,and Kai Kaus, send

for Garstwaz, and put him
to the torture, iv, 265

slays Afrasiyab, iv, 268
Garstwaz, iv, 269

Kai Kaus and, make thanks-
giving before Azargash-
asp, iv, 269

treasurer of, makes gifts to
Azargashasp, iv, 269

sends letters announcing
his triumph to all the
chiefs, iv, 270

holds festival and bestows
treasure, iv, 270

goes with Kai Kaus in state
to the temple of Azar-
gashasp, iv, 270

performs the obsequies of
Kai Kats, iv, 271

assumes the crown as sole
Shah, iv, 272

becomes world-weary, iv,
272

closes his court and with-
draws to his oratory, iv
274

prays that he may be taken
from the world, iv, 274

passes a week in prayer, iv,
274, 279

remonstrated with by the
nobles, iv, 275, 279

replies to the nobles, iv, 276
279

passes five weeks in prayer,
iv, 280

hears from Surtsh that his
prayer is granted, iv,
280

bidden to appoint Luhrasp
as his successor, iv, 281

puts off his royal robes, iv,
281

receives Zal, Rustam, and
others in audience, iv, 283
seq.

pardons Zal, iv, 291

orders an assembly to be
held on the plain, iv,
291

 

INDEX

| Kai Khusrau, treasure of, dis-

posal of, iv, 294
found by Sikandar, 160,
Waly uGAe,

charge of, to Guidarz, iv, 294

gifts of, to Giv, Zal, and
Rustam, iv, 295
Gustaham, iv, 295
Gudarz, iv, 295
Fariburz, iv, 295
Bizhan, iv, 295
Zal’s companions, lv, 297

confirms Rustam in pos-
session of Nimruz, iv, 297;
Vv, 203

bestows Kum and Ispahan
on Giv, iv, 298

confirms the charge of
Kawa’s flag, and gives
Khurasan, to Tus, iv, 300

summons and crowns Luh-
rasp, iv, 300

Zal’s protest to, against
Luhrasp‘s succession to,
iv, 301

justifies his choice of Luh-
Tasp, iv, 301

takes leave of the [rdnians,
iv, 303

women of, lament for him,
iv, 304

commends his women to the
honour of Luhrasp, iv, 305

dismisses the [ranians, iv,
305

counsels Luhrasp, iv, 305

bids Luhrasp farewell, iv,
306

sets forth on his pilgrimage
with some of his chiefs,
iv, 306
Indian parallel, iv, 138

again appealed to by the
ranians, iv, 306

reply of, iv, 307

bids his chiefs return, iv, 307

rests with his remaining
chiefs by a spring, 1v, 307

prepares for his passing, iv,
308

farewells his chiefs, iv, 308
GENERAL

Kai IKhusrau, warns his chiefs
of the coming of the snow,
iv, 308
disappears, iv, 308
Kai Kubad, Shah and founder
of the Kaianian dynasty,
142, i, 42, 373, 374; ii, 3,
SPil2, D4, 167 18"'seq-;, 20;
33, 34, 36, 37, 87, 143
144, 249, 260, 270, 274,
327, 336, 363, 390, 394;
ll, 34, 49, 51, 57, 144;
iv, 35, 70, 149, 168, 201,
293° (298, 13025) ‘vi. 574,
180, 188, 189, 202, 205,
DLO tere? Teme 7 Oe ome Vie LOT)
2EO Vile 37. 74, 25, 120;
17 2¢ ee Valle OO. L/70,. 200;
270M SIGw 332) 3) 1k, 25
brought by Rustam from
Mount Alburz, i, 382 seq.
tells his dream to Rustam,
i, 385
accepted by Zal and the
other chiefs as Shah, 1, 387
Reign of, 142, ii, 11
Note on, ii, 11
origin of, ii, 11 and nole
makes peace with Afra-
siyab, li, 20
gifts of, to Zal and Rustam,
i, 21
descendants of, commanded
by Dilafruiz, stationed on
Kai Khusrau’s left hand,
iv, 147
Kai Manush, vi, 200
Kai Pashin, son of Kai Kubad,

LieS) 23 Be 2Od be 2050-5 ay,
302

Kais, Arab chief, entertains
Khusrau Parwiz, viii,
250

Kaiser Friedrich Museum, viii,
192

Kait. See Kaid.

Kai Ugi, vi, 200
Kaiwan, [ranian statistician, vii,
II

 

 

INDEX 301

Kaiwan, calculates the arrears of
taxes, vli, II
Kakula, Turanian hero, iv, 188
reinforces Afrasiyab, iv, 188
Kakwi (cf. Karkwi), grandson of
Zanhaks E47, 1. 226
attacks the [ranians, i, 225
defeated and slain by Minu-
chihr, i, 22
Kalahir, warrior of Mazandaran,
ul, 67
tries a handgrip with Rus-
tam, ii, 67
Kalat, stronghold, iii, 39; ix, 91
home of Fartd, iii, 39
Kai Khusrau bids Tus to
avoid, ili, 39
Tus marches to, ili, 40
captured by the frdnians,
lil, 66
Kalat-i-Nadiri, stronghold, ii,
189 ; iil, 14
described, i, 14

| Kalé (Nereis), daughter of Alex-

ander in the Pseudo-Cal-
listhenes, vi, 77
Andreas, the cook,
legend of, vi, 77
Kalila and Dimna, Book of, 759.
See Fables of Bidpai.
Kaliniyus (Nicephorium, Callini-
cus, Warigh q.v., Rakka),
city situated at the junc-
tion of the Belikh and the
Euphrates, 167, vill, 188
taken by Nushirwan, vii,
218, 257
Kali, mountain in Turan, ii, 328?
Piran sends Kai Khusrau
to be brought up on, ii,
328
goes to see Kai Khusrau
at, li, 329
Kxalis, Riman chief, iv, 356
sent as envoy to Ilyas, iv,
352, 358
Luhrasp, iv, 357
entertained by Luhrasp, iv,

357

and,

1 Misprinted ‘* Kalar ”
302
Kalus, describes Gushtasp_ to
Luhrasp, iv, 358
dismissed with honour, iv,
359
Kamus, Turanian hero, 148, 149,
11, LOT, 150, 52-000, Oz;
164 seq., 168 seq., 172, 176,
L7 Ss LOL SEGe 200, 207,
200, 213, -200,62245220;
232235) 24242 meek,
252, 250, 208, 260pa Lv,
207) = Nin O70 OOme2 2 O
Story of, of Kashan, 148, iii,
108 seq.
Firdausi on, ili, 269
comes to the aid of Piran,
ill, 151
plan of campaign
adopted, ili, 162
leads the attack, iii, 168
hears of the coming of Rus-
tam, lili, 175
Rustam described by Piran
to, ili, 183
challenges Rustam, ili, 187
parleys with Rustam, iii, 188
fights, and is taken prisoner
by, Rustam, ili, 189
end of, ili, 190
KkKanabad, mountain, part of the
Binalid range north of
Nishaptir in Khurdasan.
The name may be preserved
in the modern Gunabad,
a village to the north of
that ranve) iv, 235937047;
48, 51, 55, 50, 76, 88, 112
occupied by Piran, iv, 22
Kand. See Kaid.
Kanda Gashasp, franian war-
THIOL AVAIL LOB. £22 pe LO3
speech of, vili, 166
Kandahar, city in southern
Afghanistan, i, 286; iv,
65; Vv, 233 note
Kandake (Candace q.v., Kaidafa
q.v.), Vi, 66
IKkandaros. See Kaidrush.
Kandaules. See Kaidrush.
Kand-i-Shaptr. See  Gund-i-
Shapur.

of,

GENERAL

|

 

INDEX

Kangha (Kharazm q.v.), country,
li, 189, 190

Kangdez (Gang-dizh = q.v.),
stronghold, ii, 189, 190

Kanir. See Tainush.

Kanntj (Kanauj), city near the
west bank of the Ganges
in the division of Agra in
the United Provinces of
British India, i, 261, 357;
lt S35) LV, 270, 2O8. 204"
Vil 257i wl wO4s 2O7enS a eas
Wali, TPG UNTO), US. TEDL),
129, 134, 137, 385, 386,
390, 393, 425

conquest of, by Mahmid,

i, 99, too and note,
113
Sikandar reaches, vi, 110

river of, vii, 112 and note,
390
monarch of=Shangul, vii,
140
Bahram Gur appointed heir
to, vil, 143
Karabagh (Arran), district north
of the Aras, i, 9
seat of primitive Fire-wor-
ship, 1, 56
Karakh-Maishan, town built on
the lower Tigris by Ardshir
Papakan, vi, 199, 291
note
Karan, son of Kawa, [franian
hero and the mythical
progenitor of a family
famous. in  Ashkdanian
times, I4I, 1, 207, 211, 214
seq., 344, 345, 365; ii,

TL Seg. 11S; 22, LL) ell,
(OR hy umn? S Ayal, iveysl
Niall’ it(Glsiey abs teIGy

takes the Castle of the
Alans} i; 223° seq:

reports his success to Minu-
chihina, 22
commands Naudar’s_ host,
1, 345
tells of his encounter with
Afrasiyab, 1, 350

counsels Naudar, i, 353
GENERAL INDEX

son of Kawa, with
Shidush and Kishwad, pur-
sues Kurakhan, i, 354
defeats and slays Barman,
1, 354
defeats Wisa, i, 357
meets and defeats Shama-
sds, i, 361
bears to Zav the news of
his election as Shah, i,
370
re-appearance of, in legend,
iv, 135, 146
made champion of the host,
iv 149
sent by Kai Khusrau to
welcome Shida, iv, 165
bears Kai Khusrau’s answer
to Shida, iv, 168
opposes and defeats Jahn,
iv, 178
family, of, vii, 171
glorification of, vii, 170
origin of, vii, .185
rivalry of, with Mihran,
vii, 185
mountain, the name
given from the above
hero to part of the Al-
burz range which lies
between Mount Dami-
wand and Amul and
formed his principality,
and that of his descend-
ants as late as and after
the Muhammadan con-
quest, v, 112
Karan, [ranian chief, temp. Yaz-
dagird, son of Shapur and
Bahram Gur, vi, 394;
vil, 86, 90
Karan, mountain-chief,
189
Karap (IXarpan), v, 17
meaning of, v, 14
Kara su, river, v, 14
Karaz, viii, 252 and note.
Kargasars, a wild tribe, i, 253
and note, 277, 279, 286,
290, 294, 298, 319, 340;
ii, 98; iii, 318

Karan,

Karan,

Vili,

393

Kariman, franian hero and great-
great-grandfather of Rus-
tam, iil, 4, 125 and note,
Vv, 202

Karistan, vili, 188

| Karkh, suburb of Baghdad, iv,

F475) 1%,/95
Arab defeat at, ix, 85

_ Karkh=Khurram Abad (?), vi,

2

<

7
Karkwi (cf. Kakwi), a descend-
ant of Zahhak, i, 290
attacks Sam, i, 290
slain by Sam, i, 291
Karma’il and Irma’il, Zahhak’s
cooks, 140
device of, i, 146

Karnamak - i - Ardshir - i -

Papakan, Pahlavi text,
vi, 14 note, 61, 198, 301,
3253; vii, 380

account of, vi, 195
resembles Yatkar-i-Zari-
Tan, vi, 196
purport of, vi, 196
portion of Shahnama cor-
responding with, vi, 196
compared with, vi, 200
seq., 205 seq., 255 seq.
Firdausi and, vi, 196
polo episode in, vi, 196
Karnaprivaram is, vi, 80
Karpan (Karap 4.v.), v, 14
Karsan, viii, 188, 252
gates of, shut against Khus-
rau Parwiz, viii, 252
walls of, fall down, vili, 253
Khusrau Parwiz stays at,
Vill, 253
Karshipta, mythical bird, i, 235
Karsiyun, Turanian hero, iv, 10
Karun, mountain. See Karan.
Karun, river joining the Shat al
Arab at its delta, vi, 199
note
dam on, vi, 295
Kkasa riid (Kashaf g.v.), river,
T47, Mi; 28; 68, 60, 71,72,
82, 105; iv, 90
barricade at the, ili, 29
burnt by Giy, iii, 73
304

Kashaf (Kasa riid q.v.), river in

north-eastern Khurasan,
1, 235, 296

story of the dragon of, i, 296
se

Kashan (Kasan, town in Farg-
hana, north of the Jax-
artes ?), ili, 108, 151, 170,
77.0180, eLOol, Loo, (LOZ,
ZOAM2OT 224A eS eels
iv, 189; v, 39; vii, 331,

334
Kamus of, Story of, 148, ili
108 seq.
in Turan, ili, 108
in fran, iii, 109
man of=Kamus, ii, 189
Kashan, city between Ispahan
and Kum, iil, 109
Kashmar. See Kishmar.
Kashmigan, son of Farrukhzad,
Xeno Z
Kashmihan, place north-east of
Marv, vii, 89
Bahram Gur’s victory at,
vil, 90
Sufarai’s victory at, vii, 170
note, 176
Kashmir, country, i, 113 ; li, 271,
338 5 ili, 35,152, 237, 251 ;
LV, 24, GOw O55) ve 203);
vii, 395, 396, 421
king of, vi, 31
monarch of, entertained by
Bahram Gur, vii, 140 seq.
Kastantaniya (Constantinople),
vill, 265

Kastarit. See Kyaxares.

Kaswin. See Kazwin.

Kat (Kath), one of the two
capitals of Kharazm
(Gurganj being the other)
situated on the right

bank of the Oxus, ili, 152
Kataytin (Nahid), daughter of
Cesar, wife of Gushtasp,
and mother of Asfandiyar,
154, 156, li, 3; iv, 348;
Vv; Ti,.253
referred to, 1, 55;
249, 252

Vv, 205,

GENERAL

 

INDEX

Katayutn, eldest daughter of
Cesar, iv, 348

Story of, 154, iv, 329. seq

marriage of, iv, 329 seq.

dreams of Gushtasp, iv, 329

sees and chooses Gushtasp
for her husband, iv, 330

marries Gushtasp, iv, 331

sells a jewel, iv, 332

discovers that Gushtasp is
of royal race, iv, 340

persuades Gushtasp to go
to the Sports on Ceesar’s
riding-ground, iv, 349

Cesar reproached by Gush-
tasp for his unkindness to,
iv, 350

reconciled to Cesar, iv, 351

referred to, iv, 358

receives gifts from Cesar, iv,
363

goes to fran with Gush-
tasp, iv, 364

sons of, v, 32

counsels Asfandiyar, v, 168,
175

ancestry of, v, 205

Asfandiyar’s last message

to, v, 249
laments over Asfandiyar, v,
252

consoled by Bishtitan, v, 255
Katib, Arab chief, vi, 21, 65, 120

| Katmara, Iranian hero, iv, 92

put in command of the right

wing, iv, 92
Kats, Shah. See Kai Kats.

brand-mark of, ili, 291
Kaus, son of Shah Kubad, vii,
310
Kavarazem (Gurazm q.v.), Vv, 12
Kavi (Ixai), ii, 8
Usa, ii, 25
Kavi (Kavig), v, 14
Kavig (Kavi), v, 17
meaning of, v, 14
Kavi Husravah (Kai Khusrau
G0), AV, 9137, E39
Kavya Ushana (Kai Kaus, q. v,)
li, 25

Kavyan (Kaian), ii, 8
 

GENERAL INDEX

Kawa, the smith, 140, i, 155 seq.,
207,254 5 Iv; DO5, 178);
vli, 185; viii, 72; ix, 30

Zahhak and, Story of, r40, i,
154 seq.

revolts and goes to Faridun,
iy 157

leads Faridtin’s van, i, 160

flag of, i, 143, 160, 211, 217,
2LOi23 7) 332051 12, 227,
341, 349, 354, 499, 402,
405, 406, 410; ill, 25, 38,
39; 43,84, 65, 116, 127,
126, 129, 135 seq., 149,
Ges MV za 2 5, 34, 55,
59, 92, 112, 146, 180, 226,
243, 282, 292, 359; vi,
SA MeN 2 EOhs Vill 385) °
ix, 30, 67
origin of, i, 157
Bizhan’s prowess with, iii,

93
half of, taken by Piran,
lii, 94
staff of, cloven by Pulad-
wand, iii, 258
Tus confirmed in charge
of, by Kai Khusrau, iv,
300
rescued by Girami,v, 59,69
Kawian, standard, i, 211
Kaziruin, town west of Shiraz, vi,

199
Kazwin, city north-west of Tih-
ran, v, 30
Kerator. See Taintsh.
Keresdsp, Keresdspa, franian

hero, i, 234, 235, 373; 1,4
account of, in the Zanda-
vasta, 1, 172
later development of, i, 174
Keresavasda (Garsiwaz q.v.), ii,
189; iv, 137
(KXharlikh), a Turkish
tribe dwelling north of the
Jaxartes and east of
Tashkand, vii, 92
Khalid, famous Arab general
temp. Muhammad, v, 12
begins hostilities against
Persian Empire, ix, 66

Khalaj

VOL. IX.

395

Khalid, recalled to lead Syrian
campaign, iv, 66
Khallukh (cf. Khalaj), iv, 10,
156; Vv, 42, 44, 55, OI, 74,
QO, 107, 112, 157, 242, 255
Khan of Chin, the, temp. Kai
Kats, ii, 383
temp. Kai Khusrau, 148, 149,
iii, 108, 160 seq., 164 seq.,
W720 Lys SEG-. Ol, alod,
187, 190 seq., 196, 198 seq.,
205, 207 Seq., 215, 217, 221
222) 220 9SEGs,..235; 241,
242, 251, 252,( 250, 208,
320 ; Iv, 60, 135, 238 seq. ;
v, 199, 220
Khan of Chin=Arjasp, v, 47, 51,
2
temp. Sikandar, ambassadors
from, come to Dara, vi, 35
temp. Bahram Gur, 165, vii,
49, 91, 93, 97, IOI, II!
invades [ran, vii, 84
responds graciously to the
franians’ embassage, vii,
88
gives himself up to pleasure
at Marv, vii, 88
fate of, in war with Bahram
Gur, vil, 5, 90
crown of, placed in a Fire-
temple, vii, 95
Khtshnawaz, son of, vii,
165
temp. Nushirwan, 168, vii, 186,
B2OnSegiy = V1ll 4330525075
89, 97 seq.
daughter of, married to
Nushirwan, 168, vii, 213,

357
historically ruler of the
Turks, vii, 317
relations of, with
wan, vii, 88
the Haitalians, vil, 317,

Nushir-

328 seq.
embassy of, to Nushirwan,
vu, 329

hears of the destruction of
his embassy by the Hai-
talians, vii, 330

U
GENERAL

Khan of Chin, leads forth his

troops, vil, 330
defeats the Haitdlians, vii,
332
Nushirwan takes counsel
about, vii, 333, 334
descent of, from Afrasiyab
and Arjasp, vii, 334,
Nushirwan writes to, vii,

Sof, ! sé
purposes to invade fran, vii,

OM,

hears of Nushirwan’s ad-
vance, vii, 338

takes counsel, vii, 338

sends embassy to Nushir-
wan, vli, 339

hears his envoy’s account
of Nushirwan, vii, 344

offers to make affinity with
Nushirwan, vii, 345

attempts to outwit Nushir-
wan, vil, 351

gives audience to Mihran
Sitad, vii, 351

invites Mihran Sitad_ to
choose a wife for Nushir-
wan, vii, 352

consults the astrologers, vil,
354

entrusts his daughter to
Mihran Sitad, vil, 354

gives presents to Mihran
Sitad, vil, 356

parts with his daughter at
the Jihtin, vil, 356

daughter of, 268
described, vii, 352, 357

evacuates territory, vil,

358

Khan of Chin (see too Parmida),

temp, Hurmuzd, Ihusrau
Parwiz, and Yazdagird,
D7L, Lg walls IAT) SEG.
TOO, TOU 2O4n os, e20,
263 seq., 306, 316 seq.,
342 seg., 340 seg., 351,
352, 356, 357, 363; 1x,
87, 102

supposed war of, with Hur-
muzd, viil, 72

 

INDEX
| Khan

of Chin, marriage of
daughter of, with Nushir-
wan referred to, viii, 72
letter of, vill, 77
dismissed by Hurmuzd with
gifts, vill, 152
refuses advances of Bahram
Chubina, vill, 153
becomes friends with Bah-
ram Chubina, viii, 172
brother of, 773, viii, 190, I91
reports flight of Gurdya,
Vili, 351
ordered to go in pursuit,
Vill, 351
parley of, with Gurdya,
Vill, 352
daughter of, viii, 190
killed by lon-ape,
Wildes 2 A
queen of, viii, 190
asks Bahram Chubina to
avenge her daughter, viii,
324
disgraced, vill, 344
welcomes Bahram Chubina,
vill, 316
swears friendship with Bah-
ram Chubina, viii, 317
dominated by Makatura,
LIAS 7
advised by Bahram Chubina
to slight Makatura, viii,
318
views fight between Bahram
Chubina and Makatutra,
Vili, 320
sends gifts to Bahram Chu-
bina, viii, 321
refuses to give up Bahram
Chubina, viii, 329
distrust Bahram  Cht-
bina, vili, 334
impress of seal of, obtained
by Kharrad, vili, 338
burns Kulin’s kindred, viii,
334
seeks in vain for Kharrad,
vill, 344
mourns for Bahrara
bina, vili, 344

173;

Chu-
 

GENERAL

Khan of Chin, brother of, 1773
=Bizhan, ix, 97
Khanagi, Riman noble, vili, 375,
378
leads Czesar’s embassy to
Khusrau Parwiz, vili, 374
Khusrau Parwiz’ gifts to,
Vill, 382
returns to Rum, viii, 382
Khan-i-Irman (Arman 4q.v.), 111,
290
Khanjast (Chijast, Urumiah),
lake in Azarbdijan, iv,
136, 264; vill, 282
Khar (IKhuvar) of Rai, district
and town (now Aradiun),
so called to distinguish
it from a town of the same
name in Pars, situated
south-east of Tihran, 1,
368, 374, 381
Kharazm (Khiva), country, ii,
TSO 1Q0)5) 1V, LL; F255;
60,01 72.157, 1737 Loo,
2O7 em Vie 2i en evi e2S3O,

359

Kharazmians, people, ii, 190;
Va 072

Kharijites, Muhammadan sect, i,
13

Kharrad, franian hero, i, 365;
ribs lta hy ard este um eh ey Loli
Aiea o7s eS Opens Lr
273, 289; Iv, I5

Kharrad, nonce name assumed
by Asfandiyar, v, 146,
149

Kharrad, temp. Ardshir Papa-
kan, franian warrior, 161,
vi, 284

takes Ardawan prisoner, vi,

228

temp. Bahram Gur, franian
chief, vii, 85

temp. Kubad son of Piruz,
archimage, vii, 207

temp. Nushirwan=(?) the
above, vii, 251

Kharrad, sacred Fire, vi, 212
and note, 226, 391

Kharrad. bower of, vii, 83

 

INDEX 307

Kharrad, son of Barzin (Hur-

muzd Garabzin or Galab-
zin), I7I-173, viii, 74, 76,
158 seq., 205, 225, 257 seq.,
269, 270, 331 seq., 381 ;
UXA AD Del 2. 2

sent by Hurmuzd as envoy
to Sawa, vill, 110

beguiles Sawa and flees, viii,
III

flight of, reported to Sawa,
vill, 112

counsels Bahram Chubina,
Vill; 120

seeks, refuge, viii, 123

counts [ranian slain, viii,
127

blames and counsels Bahram
Chubina for his behaviour
to Parmida, vili, 144,
146

questions Bahram Chubina
on his adventure with the
one ger, vili, 158

flees from Balkh with arch-
scribe, villi, 159

makes report of Bahram
Chubina to Hurmuzd, viii,
160

real name of, vili, 190

waits on Khusrau Parwiz,
vill, 252

speech of, to Caesar, viii, 259,
275

masters Czasar’s talismans,
vill, 274, 275

Cesar’s gift to, viii, 278

praised by Cesar, vill, 279

made chief minister, vill, 314

speech of, to Khan, viii, 332

attempts to prejudice Bah-
ram Chubina to the Khan,
Vill, 333

intrigues against Bahram
Chubina, vili, 334 seq.

cures daughter of queen of
Chin, viii, 336

incites Kulin to kill Bahram
Chubina, viii, 337

asks boon of queen of Chin,
Vili, 338
308

Kharrad, returns to fran and is
rewarded, villi, 345
reads out Cesar’s letter to
Khusrau Parwiz, viii, 376
end of, ix, 4
chosen to visit Khusrau
Parwiz at Taisaflin, ix, 9
Ashtad and, parley with
Galintish, ix, II
visit Khusrau Parwiz, ix,
I2
report to Shirwi, ix, 27
Kharrad, franian general, de-
feats Khazars, vill, 96
Kharrad, father of Hurmuzd, ix,
102
Khashash, Turanian hero, v, 47
made leader of the van, v,

46

Khata (Cathay), northern China,
li, 357

Khatlan (Khuttal), a general
name for the non-Muham-
madan regions to the
north and east of Khura-
san (=Haital), more
specifically a district on
the right bank of the
upper Oxus west of, or
forming part of, Badakh-
shan, ti) (278; 62285. sv,
65; Vil, 94, 331, 359

Khatutn, consort of the Khan of
Chin, vii, 5

fate of, in war with Bahram

Girvan

Khawar, the West or Khura-

san (?), perhaps=Khar

Gils AAV) OLAT eA Ome CFE

Karan (mountain).
Khazar, Khazars, region and

people north of the Cau:
CASUS eho ee OS ee Lye
71, 316, 352 seq., 358, 361 ;
Vill, 103) 2IRAy e224 ee ecvaii,
_ 945377:.379
invasion of, viii, 72, 93
defeated, viii, 96
Khazarwan, Turanian hero, 142
Shamasas and, invade Zabu-
listan, i, 345, 358

GENERAL

INDEX

| Khazarwan parleyed with by

 

Mihrab to gain time, i,
358
slain by Zal, 1, 360; ii, 18
Khazarwan, temp. Bahram Gur,
king of Gilan, vii, 85
takes the Khan prisoner,
vii, 90
Khazarwan, [ranian noble, temp.
Khusrau Parwiz, speech
of, viii, 241
Khazra, treasure, vill, 406 and
note
Khilafat, the, i, 12 seq.
Khil’at, robe of honour, i, 82

| Khir, place on the south-western

_ Khurdsan,

shore of Lake Niris in
Pars, vi, 198
Khisr (Al Khidr, qg.v.), chief and
prophet, vi, 159
goes with Sikandar to the
Gloom, vi, 159
parts company with Sikan-
dar, vi, 160
finds the Fount of Life, vi,

160

Khiva (Kharazm), country, ii,
190

Khorasan. See Khurasan.

Khshathré-saoka (Gang-dizh ?),
stronghold, ii, 189, 190
Khudai-nama (Bastan-Nama), iby
OO iw 4:
province in north-
eastern fran, 176, ii, 399 ;
IVA LAC NZOS PERV Zon 77a:
Vi} 242530 ovile: LOO;
214, 224, 237, 335; Viii,
78, 94, 241, 313, 355, 369;
ix, 59, 69, 87, 88, 92
Narsi made ruler of,
99
governor of, viii, 75
prince of, vili, 173
Mahwi becomes master of,
1S La

vil,

Khurasan, chieftain, viii, 241

speech of, vill, 240
Khurasani. See Makh.

| Khurdad, ameshaspenta, i, 88 ;

lil, 287, 328
 

GENERAL

IKKhurdad, month and day, i, 88,
PEOS Vill Diz, 2257350 >
WIN, eat 173
Khurm, seat of an oracle, vi, 82
meaning of, vi, 82
oracle of, consulted, vi, 184
Khurra-i-Ardshir. See Ardshir
Khurra.

Khurram Abad (Karkh ?), city,
Vi, 327, 357 and note
Khurshid, genius and day, i, 88 ;

V, 92 nole
Khurshid, franian chief,
270, 296
Khushnawaz, ruler of the Haita-
lians, 166, vii, 194, 198,

vill,

359; Vill, 75, 168, 242,
245, 267
Piriz advances against, vii,

164

writes to Pirtz, vii, 165

appeals to Bahram Gur’s
treaty, vii, 166

prayer of, to God, vii, 167

digs a trench, vii, 67

defeats Pirtz by a feint, vii,
168

correspondence of,
Sufarai, vii, 174 seq.

defeated by Sufarai, vii,
177

takes refuge in Kuhandizh,
vii, 177

sues for peace, vii, 178

releases Kubad, Ardshir, and
other captives, and gives
up the spoil, vii, 180

Khusrau, Shah. See Kai Khus-
Tau.
Khusrau, [ranian noble,

164, vi, 408

elected Shah in succession
to Yazdagird son of Sha-
pur, vi, 395; vii, II

proposes that Bahram Gur
shall begin the ordeal, vi,
409

does homage to Bahram Gur,
vi, 410

honoured by Bahram Gur,
Vili, 10

with

163,

INDEX

Khusrau, father of Khazarwan,
Vili, 241, 296 (?)
Khusrau Parwiz, son of Hur-
muzd, Shah, 171-175, v,
294, 306 nole; vi, 3; Viil,
71, 74, 170, 173, 174, 181,
182, I9I seq., 216, 304,
306, 316, 334, 335, 342,
358, 3607 seq., 395 nole,
413 note; 1%, 4 °Séq:, 11;
I2, 25, 26 note, 30, 31, 33
seq., 38 Seq., 45 Seq.
horse of, story of, viii, 91
Hurmuzd plots to kill, viii,

399

174

flees, vili, 175

adherents gather round,
viii, 175

swear fealty to, viii, 176
goes to Baghdad, viii, 184
visits Hurmuzd in prison,

viii, 185, 198, 230
extensive _ historical

quests of, viii, 187
materials for reign of, in

Shahnama, viii, 187
flight of, historical, from

Ctesiphon, viii, 188
affects Christianity in exile,

viii, 188
helped on terms by Emperor

Maurice, viii, 188
historical campaign of,

against Bahram Chubina,

viii, 189
visits of, to Fire-temple at

Shiz, viii, 190, 283, 397,

312
Nu’man bin Munzir exe-

cuted by, vili, 190
triumphal arch of,

192
Assurbanipal and, reigns of,

compared, vill, 193
fall of, historical account of,

viii, 193 seq.
attempts of Heraclius to

make peace with, vill, 194,

195
treatment of defeated gen-

erals by, viii, 194

con-

vill,
GENERAL, INDEX

IKXhusrau Parwiz, prediction con-

cerning, viii, 194 |

Reign of, 196, vili, 186 seq.
Note on, vu, 186 seq.

Hurmuzd’s requests to, vill, |
199 |

spies’ report of Bahram |
Chubina to, viii, 201

takes counsel, vili, 202

marches to meet Bahram |
Chubina, viii, 203

interview of, with Bahram
Chubina, vili, 204 seq.

attacked by Turk and saved
by Gustaham, vili, 220

dissuaded from making a
night-attack, vill, 22

troops of, tampered with by
Bahram Chubina, — viii,
226

sends away his baggage,
viii, 228

combat of, with Bahram
Chubina, viii, 228, 229

retreats to, and holds, the
bridge of Nahrawan, viii,
228

worsts Yalan-sina, vili, 229

flees to Taisafun, viii, 229

counselled by Hurmuzd,
vill, 230

prepares to flee, vill, 231

takes refuge in a shrine,
Vill, 233

arrives at Babil, viii, 249

entertained by Kais, vill, 250
Mihran Sitad, viii, 251

town of Karsan and, viii,
252

interview of, with Hermit,
Vill, 254

warned against Gustaham,
Vill, 255, 250

welcomed by Cesar, viii,
257

takes up his abode at
Warigh, viii, 257

instructs his embassy to
Cesar, vill, 257

Czesar offers daughter to,
viii, 266

 

I<husrau Parwiz, accepts Casar’s

offer, vill, 269, 270

welcomes Niyatus and
Maryam, vii, 280

marches to Duk, viii, 282

Mausil and, viil, 283

returns to Duk, viii, 284

Dara Panah goes over to,
vili, 286

forges letter to Bahram
Chubina, viii, 286

sends corpse of Kut to
Ceesar, vili, 291

decides to fight without
Ruman help, viii, 292, 293

arrays his host, vili, 293

resolves to fight in person,
Vili, 295

bodyguard of, vili, 296

leaves Bahram in charge of
host, villi, 296

flees from Bahram Chubina,
vill, 298

saved by Surtsh, viii, 299

returns to Niyatus and
Maryam, villi, 299

suspected of Christian ten-
dencies, vill, 308

gives banquet to Niyatus
and Rumans, vili, 309

restores captured cities to
Rum, viii, 312

makes Kharrad, son of Bar-
zin, chief minister, viii,
314

proclamation of, vili, 314

demands extradition of Bah-
ram Chubina, viii, 328

advised to send envoy to
Khan, viii, 329

resolves to put Bandwi to
death, viii, 354

summons Gustaham, viii,

hears of Gurdya’s doings,
viii, 356, 358

writes to Gurdya vill, 359

hears of the death of Gusta-
ham, vill, 362

welcomes Gurdya to court,
Vili, 362
Y Giclee 8 er pig. bg 8

  

GENERAL

Khusrau Parwiz, Gurdya dresses

up to please, vill, 363

warned by Shirin against
Gurdya, vill, 364

makes Gurdya overseer of
royal bower, vill, 364

oppresses Rai, vill, 365

relieves Rai, viii, 368

organizes the realm, viii, 369
seq.

puts to death adherents of
Bandwi and Gustaham,
vill, 370

consults astrologers on birth
of Shirwi, viii, 372

grieved at Shirwi’s horo-
scope, viii, 372

consults the high priest,
viii, 372

writes to Cesar, vill, 373

Cesar’s embassy to, viii,
374

gives Casar’s gifts to Shirwi,
vill, 38L
presents to Khanagi, viii,
382

and Shirin, ix, 7
Story of, 174, viii, 382 seq.

equipage of, for the chase,
vill, 384

married to Shirin, viii, 386

justifies his marriage, viii,
388

gives gilded chamber to
Shirin, viii, 389

displeasured with Shirwi,
vill, 390

and throne of Takdis, viii,
391 seq.

palace of, story of, viii, 400
seq.

Farghan and, viii, 401 seq.

imprisons Ruman artificers,
Vili, 402

releases Rtiman artificers,
Vili, 403

treasures of, viii, 406

Guraz intrigues against, viii,
408

device of, against Guraz and
Cesar, vill, 409

INDEX 311

Khusrau Parwiz, sends Farrukh-
zad to the _ host, viii,
412

hears Kubad proclaimed
Shah, viii, 416

arms and hides in garden,
vili, 417

palace of, plundered viii,
418

discovered, vill, 419

holds talk with Farrukhzad,
viii, 420

recalls former presage, vill,
420

imprisoned, viii, 421

duration of reign of, vili,

421 .

charges against, 1x, 4, 5, 9,
10

reply of, to charges, ix, 5,
14 Seq.

Haram of, ix, 4, 5

last days of, Theophanes’
account of, ix, 6

Shirwi’s treatment of, ix, 7

sons of, executed, ix, 7, 35

imprisoned at Taisafun, ix,
9

companioned by Shirin, 1x,
29

Barbad visits, ix, 29
laments over, ix, 30
steed of, ix, 30

son of, ix, 31

referred to, ix, 33 and note

kingdom of Hira abolished
by, ix, 66

Muhammad’s letter to, ix,
66

Khusrau and Shirin, Persian

poem, viii, 192

Khusrau, father of Piruz, 175,

vii, 44, 46, 48, 49, 51, 57

Khusrau, a miller, 276, 1x, 99.
See Miller.

Khutan, town and district in
eastern Turkistan, 146,
150, li, 277, 288, 325, 357;
383); Diy 107, 242.) 247",
iv, 26, 219); Vil; 84; 115,
339, 334, 359
S12

IKkhutan, raided by Giv, iii, 247
monarch of, iv, II
Afrasiyab, iv, 230
Kai KKhusrau marches
through, iv, 240
people of, make submission
to Nushirwan, vii, 360
Kkhuza’ Arab tribe, vi, 65
rule of, ended by Sikandar,

vi, 120
Kkhuzan, a king of Pars, iv, 146,
191
meets Kai Khusrau’ in

Sughd, iv, 255
Khuzians, people of Khuzistan,
q.v., Iv, 146
Kkhuzistan (Susiana, ’Arabistan),
province at the head of
the Persian Gulf, vi, 290
and note, 298, 327, 357;
vili, 109 and note, 193
annexed by Arabs, ix, 68
Khuzra, treasure, ix, 20
Khvaittik-das, i, 60
Catullus on, i, 60
Khyons (Hvyaonas), v, 13, 25
Kibchak, region east of the Jax-
ates and north of Tash-
kand, iv, 254 ; ix, 93
Kibtis, vi, 397 and note
Kimak, a river in Kibchak, iv,
203, 231
Kimmerians, the, i, 17
Kinam-i-Asiran, near to, or iden-
tical with, the ruins of
Shus (Sus, Susa), vi, 327,
357 and note
King, the ideal, iii, 16
of kings, title of, vi, 193, 197
meaning of, in Achae-
menian and _ Parthian
times, vi, 198
assumed by Ardshir Papa-
kan, vi, 193, 199, 254,
258, 273
of the Commons, vii, 3
piece in chess, vii, 382, 385
position of, vii, 388, 422
check to, vi‘, 422
mate to, vil, 423
piece in nard, vii, 382, 389

 

GENERAL INDEX

Kings, Book of, Firdaust’s, i, 43
Persian, vili, 73
Tribal. See Tribal.
Itirman, region in southern fran,
DSS Ve WAG) avd aes leer s
57, 59, 199, 202, 205, 245,
252s Vile RAS weal eeeo he
Dara retires to, vi, 46
etymology of, vi, 204, 236
Ardshir Papakan’s invasion
of, vi, 205, 245
Kirmanshah, title, vi, 313, 368
Ikirmanshah, city between Bagh-
dad and Hamadan, vii,
187; vill, 192
Kirmanshahan, city in Kirman,
south of Yazd, vi, 368
Kirwan (Karwan, district north
of Jaxartes ?), ix, 93

| Kirwi, [ranian noble, vii, 23

story of, vii, 22
Kishmar, plage south of Nisha-

pur in the Kuhistan dis-
trict of Khurasan, v, 35

Cypress of, v, 27
account of, v, 28, 34
Gushtasp and, v, 34

Kishwad, franian hero, father

of (}Gudarze 757) 1,207)
344), BOS eli peer Tas
1S) 223073. LOWE Le
138, 318, 384, 399, 404,
409; ill, 19, 24, 33, 45,
LOO} 2 wi23,, §205 LARS
[545 Lo7 i205, 280. 302.
305, 308, 311, 327, 339;
iv," 29,) 32; 35, ©3, 2475
174, 180, 263, 294, 310,
360, vill, 104

Karan, Shidush, and, pursue
Kurtkhan, i, 354

sent by Zal to release the
ranian captives, 1, 367

| Kishwaristan, [ranian hero, iv,

148
commands the troops from
Barbaristan and Rum, iv,
148
Kisra, Shah, 766.
wan.
Kitradad, Nask, i, 373

See Nushir-
GENERAL INDEX

Knathaiti, Pairika, female per-
sonification of idolatry, i,
172
Kobad, Shah. See Kubdad.
Ktesias, Greek historian (5th
century B.C.), vi, 13, 68
legend of Cyrus in, li, 9; vi,
195
Gutschmid on, vi, 195
account of Semiramis in, v,
293
Persica of, v, 293
Kubad, [ranian hero, brother of
Karan, 242, i, 207
acts as Minuchihr’s scout, i,
227
parleys with Tur, i, 217
accepts Barman’s challenge
to single combat, i, 347
dissuaded by Karan, i, 347
reply of, i, 347
fights and is slain, i, 348
Kubad, Shah. See Kai Kubdad.
Kubad, son of Piriz and father
of Nushirwan, Shah (Ko-
bad), 1266, vi, 3, 208;
vil, 179 seq. and note, 226,
2A7 3 Vill, 25, 40, 72; 168,
169, 245, 265, 285, 312,
8601701, 22,25
captivity of, among the
Haitalians, vii, 160
leads the rearguard in the
war with the Turkmans
(Haitalians), vii, 164
taken prisoner, vii, 168
released, vii, 180
made Shah instead of Bal-
ash, vii, 182, 188
Reign of, 166, vii, 183 seq.
Note on, vii, 183 seq.
historical sketch of, vii,
183
title of, viii, 183 and note
reform of taxation by, vii,
183 note, 215
with the help of Shapur of
Rai overthrows and puts
Stifarai to death, vii, 191
Seq.
dethroned, vii, 184, 195

313

IXubad, imprisoned, vii, 184
escapes, vii, 184, 197
marriage of, vii, 184, 186,
198

gives his wife a signet-ring,
vil, 198

cedes Chaghan to the Hai-
talians in return for their
help, vii, 198

goes to Ahwaz, vii, 198

hears of the birth of Nushir-
wan, vii, 199 ;

marches on Taisafin, vii,
199

pardons the franians and
Jamasp, vii, 200

makes Rizmihr chief minis-
ter, vii, 200

wars of, with Rum, vii, 187,
200

takes cities from Rum, vii,
200

makes his capital at Ma-
da’in, vii, 201

builds a city and hospital,
vil, 201

drought in reign of, vii, 201

Mazdak and, vii, 184, 201

seq.

Mazdak’s parable to, vil,
201

converted by Mazdak, vii,
184, 204

presides over the disputa-
tion between Nushirwan
arid Mazdak, vii, 207

gives judgment against Maz-
dak, vii, 208

hands over Mazdak and
his followers to Nushir-
wan, vii, 208

repentence of, vii, 209

testament of, vii, 210, 316

age of, vii, 210

death of, vii, 210

sons of, vii, 316

Kubad (Shirwi g.v.), son of Khus-

rau Parwiz and Maryam,
Shah, 175, viii, 190, 196;
UKs SSeq.; Os Lig tenia, 24,
32, 47, 04
314

Kubdad (Shirwi), secret and public

names of, vill, 371, 416
proclaimed Shah, viii, 416
imprisons Khusrau Parwiz,

vill, 421
accedes to throne, viii, 421
Reign of, 1775, 1x, 3

Note on, 1x, 3

tragic, 1x, 3

pestilence during, ix, 3
boorishness of, ix, 3
difficult situation of, ix, 3
reproached by his sisters, ix,

IKkubad, son of Jamson of Ikubad,
Vil, 316
plot to make, Shah, vii, 316
Kubard, Tiuirdnian hero, iv, 190
commands the left, iv, I90
Kuch, tribe or town (Kuk ?) in
Kirman, li, 226
Kufa, city west of the Euphrates
and in the neighbourhood of
Mashad ’Ali (Nedjef), viii,
190; 1x, 68, 69
wood of, vi, 381
founded by Sa’ad, ix, 67
Kuh, nonce name assumed by
Human, iti, 198
Kuhandizh (Baigand q.v.), vii,
177
Khushnawaz takes refuge in,
Ville 77
Kuhila, Turanian hero, iv, 181
slain by Minuchihr, iv, 181
Kuhistan, generally a mountain-
ous region, particularly
that of northern fran,
Parthia, or of the high
ranges further south, but
in the Shahnama=Ma
wara’u’n-Nahr (Transox-
ania), li, 199
Kuhram, Turanian hero, 157, li,
349
chosen to fight with Barta,
iv, 97 § \V, 29
. slain by Barta, iv, 105
Kuhram, brother or son of Ar-
jasp, 156, v, 29, 58, 89
Seq., 106 seg., 112, 141, 159

GENERAL INDEX

| Iktuhram, commands one wing of

| the host, v, 46

| in chief, v,

sent by Arjasp to attack

Balkh, v, go

troops of, storm Balkh, burn
the Fire-temple, and slay
Zarduhsht and the priests,
Vv, 92
stationed on the left, v, 95

mortally wounds Farshid-
ward, v, 95

appointed by Arjasp to send
away the spoil of Balkh
in the charge of his
younger brothers, v, 108

commands the right, v, 110

defeated by Asfandiyar, v,
119

bidden to prepare for war,
Vala

retreats to the Brazen Hold,
Pls e

mistakes Bishutan for As-
fandiyar, v, 152

hears the cries of the fran-

| ian watch from the Brazen
Hold and takes counsel
with Andariman, v, 155

makes for the Brazen Hold

| with his troops, v, 156

pursued by Asfandiyar, v,

56

150

encountered and _ taken
prisoner by Asfandiyar,
v, 157

executed, v, 158 and note
| Kujaran, city and province on
the Persian Gulf, vi, 205,
206, 232
Haftwad migrates from, to
stronghold, vi, 235
Kulbad, Turanian hero, brother
Oh Pinan, 146, 2592,
24235) 1l; LS, 2OA soon
iil, 166, 177, 198, 199, 205,

 

2QTO, u222,"230, 244 e5en
iv, 10, 26
wounded by Zal, i, 361
death and revival of, in

legend, li, 119
oe ot

- Tires

as

bee

  

A, ED: LG T PECL ET VS 6 T%

 

GENERAL INDEX

KXulbad, pursues Kai Khusrau, ii,
377 Seq.
chosen to fight with Fari-
burz, iv, 97
slain by Fariburz, iv, 99
Kulun, Turanian hero, i, 382, 387
sent by Afrasiyab to inter-
cept Rustam, i, 383
slain by Rustam, 1, 386
Kulin, Turk in league with
IKXharrad against Bahram
Chiubina, 173, vili, 335
incited by Kharrad to kill
Bahram Chubina, viii, 337
arrives at Marv by help of
Khan’s seal, viii, 339
seeks interview with Bah-
ram Chubina, viii, 339
stabs Bahram Chubina, viii,
349
maltreated, vili, 340
kindred of, burnt, viii, 344
Kum, city in ‘Irak ’Ajami,
between Tihran and Ka-
shan, li, 399
bestowed on Giv by Kai
Kaus, i, 399
Kai Khusrau, iv, 298
Kumar, city or cape in India, ii,
103 and note
Kundrav, minister of Zahhak,
_ I40
mythological origin of, i, 143
Faridun and, Story of, r4o,
i, 164
goes to Zahhak with tidings
of Faridun, i, 165
Kundur, Turanian hero, iii, 152,
POS a 2lOw 205.5 2505) ive
112,
worsted by Rustam, iii, 224
stationed on the right, v, 94
Kunduz (Kuhandizh, Baigand
q-v.), Iv, 151
Afrasiyab encamps at, iv,
I51
marches from, iv, 154
Kkur (Cyrus), river in Transcau-
casia flowing into the
Caspian sea, v, 13
Kuraish, Arab tribe, vi, 65

Kuran, vi, 65;

| Kurd, Kurds,

 

315

IKurakhan, son of Afrasiyab, i,
92; iv, 10
counsels Afrasiyab, ili, 301
summoned and sent with
troops to Bukhara’ by
Afrasiyab, iv, 154
joined by Afrasiyab, iv, 186
defeated by Gustaham son
of Naudar, iv, 193
defeat of, announced to
Afrasiyab, iv, 194

Kurakhan, governor of Balkh,

Vill, 22
vill, 277 note ;
ix, 81 and nole
quoted, i, 99; v, 166; viii,
2, 192; 1x, 81 and note
references to Alexander the
Great in, vi, 15, 78, 84
legend of Moses and the
salt fish in, vi, 77
Gog and Magog in, vi, 78
the people of
Kurdistan q.v., 161, i, 9;
Vi, 193, 203, 257
language, i, 64
legend of the origin of the,
1, 146
~Ardshir Papakan’s war with,
in Karnamak, vi, 196,
206, 256
Shahnama, vi, 230 seq.

| Kurdistan, mountainous region

north of Mesopotamia, vi,
330
Kurdzad, daughter of Mihrak
q.v.
Kuria Muria Islands, off the
southern coast of Arabia,
Wle72.
Kurtkhan, Turanian warrior, i,
353
sent by Afrasiyab to attack
Pars? iy 353
Kurus, Indian tribal race, iv,
388
Kus, i, 177. See Tammisha.
Kut, Riman warrior, 172, viii,
281, 289, 291
slain by Bahram Chubina
vill, 290
316

Ixut, corpse of, sent back to

Rumans, viii, 291

Kutch (vead Kuch q.v.), ili, 34

Kutib, father of Husain (or
Ha’iy) one of Firdausi’s
patrons, i, 35; ix, I21

Kyaxares (Kastarit), king or
chief and leader in the
confederacy that over-
threw Nineveh, i, 18

I

Labarum, the, v, 306 note

Ladan (Pashan), battle of, iii,

13 seq., 80 seqg., 89 seq.,

E2373) 1V;, 0270372090; 120;

299

Ptolemy son of.

Ptolemy.

Lahhak, Turanian hero, brother
of Pirans 752; 1,592 5" i,
323 note; ii, 90), 166,
LOST Vel ee
133, 160, 162

Lagus, See

summons Piran to save
Farangis, il, 322
pursues the frdnians to

Mount Hamawan, ili, 135
commands with Farshid-
ward the right wing, iv, 26
‘attacks the franians in
flank, iv, 82
opposed by Gurgin, iv, 83
goes to help Piran and
attacks Giv, iv, 85
prowess of, iv, 86
put in chief command with
Farshidward, iv, 94
Piran’s instructions to, iv,

95
Farshidward and, hear of the

death of Piran and the

coming of Kai Khusrau,

Mig, sei

lament for Piran, iv, 112

take counsel with the host,
LVDS

fight, and escape from,
franian outpost, iv, 116

GENERAL INDEX
| Lahhak, Farshidward and,

re-
ferred to, iv, 118, 120, 126
repose themselves, iv, 121
corpses of, brought back
by, ebizhan> aeiveanenZo.
132
deaths of, announced to
Afrasiyab, iv, 152
Lambak, a water-carrier, 164
entertains Bahram Gur, vii,
13 seq.
rewarded by Bahram Gur,
vil, 20

Land of Darkness. See Gloom.

| Land-tax, Mahmud’s remission

 

of, vi, 196, 208

Nushirwan’s reform of, vii,
2S 22

Latin version, early, of Pseudo-
Callisthenes. See Julius
Valerius.
Launderer, a, foster-father of

Darab, 758, v, 292

finds Darab in the Farat, v,
296

Darab adopted by, and his
wife, v, 297

quits his home with wife
and Darab and settles
elsewhere, v, 298
becomes wealthy but
sticks to trade, v, 298

perturbed at Darab’s youth-
ful escapades, v, 298

brings up Darab to be a
cavalier, v, 299

Darab’s lack of natural
affection for, v, 300

wife of, informs Darab of
his case, v, 300

Rashnawad sends for, and
his wife, v, 304
informed by, of the case

of Darab, v, 308

visits, with his wife, Darab
at his accession, v, 311

dismissed with gifts, v, 312

| Lazhawardi, fort, ix, 93
| Lazica, region on the eastern

shore of the Black Sea,
vii, 215; vill, 194
GENERAL

| Luhradsp, successes of, iv, 60,

Lazic war, renewed by Hur-
muzd, viii, 76
Bahram Chutubina defeated
in, vill, 76
Leech of Kaid, 759. See Kaid.
Legend, Syriac Christian, of
Alexander. See Syriac.
Leo, constellation, ii, 405; iii,
Ol =SGtas, oV1,5 172° 060);
Vil; 410)>" “Vill, 122; 394:
Libra, constellation, i, 310; vi,

97
Life, Fount of. See Fount.
Water of, r6o .Id.
Plutarch’s, of Alexander the
Great, vi, 67
Lion, lions, slain by Rakhsh, 743,
li, 45
Asfandiyar, 156, v, 125
Bahram Gur, 163-165, vii,
Dome.
-ape, 173, Vili, 322 seq.
Lion’s House, constellation of
Leo, i, 188
Lion’s Mouth, the, place, iv, 245
Loadstone, chamber of, vili, 275
suspended cavalier in, viii,
275
Longimanus (Dirazdast), title of
Artaxerxes I, son of Xer-
xcs, v, 281
Lucerne (Medicago sativa), tax
on, vil, 215
Lich, perhaps=Kuch q.v., vii,
362
captives from, settled at
Sursan, vii, 328
Luhrasp, Shah, 754, 155, i, 42;
i, 3, 9; lv, 57, 65, 135,
337+ 347, 356 seq. Vv, 19,
20, 21 and note, 26, 29,
36, 38, 64, 68, 80, 86, 87,
gO seq., 98 seq., 104, 114,

141, 154, 155, 157, 159,
160, 167, 171, 180, 183,
205, 208, 243, 255, 281,
284% Vi 55) 2005 V1i1)
95, 148, 213, 270, 392;
ix, 104

sent to the Alans by Kai
Kkhusrau, iv, 14

INDEX 317

aX
troops of, recalled, iv, 145
nominated by Surtish to be
Kai Khusrau’s successor,
iv, 281
crowned by Kai Khusrau,
iv, 300
Zal’s protest against the
succession of, iv, 301
succession of, justified by
Kai Khusrau, iv, 301
acknowledged by Zal, iv,
302
the chiefs, iv, 303
undertakes to respect Kai
Khusrat’s wives, iv, 305
counselled and _ farewelled
by Kai Khusrau, iv, 306
addresses the chiefs, iv, 311
receives the fealty of Zal
and other chiefs, iv, 312
praises and rewards Zal,
iv, 312
coronation of, iv, 312
Reign of, 154, iv, 314 seq.
Note on, iv, 314 seq.
harangues the chiefs, iv, 316
makes Balkh his capital, iv,

317

builds the Fire-temple of
Barzin, iv, 318

shows favour to the grand-
sons of Kai Kaus, iv, 318,
321 seq.

refuses to appoint Gush-
tasp his heir, iv, 319

sends Zarir in pursuit of
Gushtasp, iv, 320

pardons Gushtasp, iv, 322

hears of Gushtasp’s flight,
lv, 323

consults Zarir and the sages,
lv, 323

searches in vain for Gush-
tasp, iv, 324

receives Kaliuis, Casar’s en-
voy, in audience, iv, 357

entertains Kalus, iv, 357

consults Zarir, iv, 358

questions Kalus, iv, 358
318

Luhrasp, dismisses Kaltis with

honour, iv, 359

sends Zarir with other chiefs
on a mission to Rum, iv,
359

message of, to Cesar, iv, 361,

welcomes and crowns Gush-
tasp on his return to
fran, iv, 364

resigns the throne to Gush-
tasp and becomes a de-
votee, v, 31

converted by Zarduhsht, v,

advises Gushtasp to resign
the kingship to Asfan-
diyar, v, 66

opposes Kuhram, v, 91

slain, v, 91, 93, 99

Asfandiyar’s vow to avenge,
Vv, 103

Lumsden, his edition of the

Shahnama, i, 76

Luna. See Moon.

M

Ma, Hittite goddess, vi, 71
=Cybele, vi, 71
priestesses of = Amazons, vi,

71
Macan, his edition of the Shah-
nama, i, 76; vi, 60
Mace, Faridun’s, i, 161, 163, 165,
168
the making of, i, 158
Macedonia, vi, 81, 82
Macedonian invasion of the East,
vi, 68, 69
Machin (China), ii, 357 note, 370,
394; ili, 46, 253, 265;
iv, I5I, 203, 220, 231, 234,
D525 Ne lA 2 TAS VAIL,
ALG. ax eTOr
Machine, flying, of Kai Kaus, ii,
103
Macrianus, Preetorian prefect, vi,
294
treachery of, to Valerian,
vi, 294

| Mada.

 

| Magi,

 

| Magus.
| Mahabharata, Indian Epic, iii,

 

GENERAL INDEX
| M’Crindle,

Ancient India of,
quoted, vi, 68, 80
See Medes.
Mada’in, Ctesiphon (Taisaftn),
and the neighbouring
Cities, LO7, 1174). vil Zoe
244, 206, 272, 337, 303;
viii, 4, 46, 192, 193
Nushirwan sends his Riman
captives to, vil, 259
palace of Khusrau Parwiz
at, story of, viii, 400
Madik, king of the Kurds, mean-
ing of, vi, 203, 256
Madofryaf, mountain, part of
the Alburz range, south-
east of the Caspian, v, 30
priests of the Medes
(Mada), i, 9; ii, 190; vi,
Bi 2S LL Lo
preservers of tradition, i, 56, ©
60
meaning of name, i, 56 and
note
rise to power of, i, 58
influence of, declines after
the Greek conquest, i, 59
principal seats of, i, 60
literature of, 1, 61
language of, i, 64
compile the prose Shah-
nama for Abu Mansur, i,
69
advocates of next-of-kin
matriage, li, 189
Magian, Magians, vii, 60
chant, vii, 60
fire, vii, 409

| Magic, 1, 51

derivation of, i, 56
sympathetic, i, 8
Magism, v, II
Magog. See Gog.
Magophonia, import of, i, 59
See Magi.

Sbivs, 310 Gavi soo

the passing of the five Pan-
davas in, compared with
that of Kai Khusrau, iv,
138
 

GENERAL INDEX

Mah Afrid, grandmother
Minutchihr, i, 205
Mah Fe daughter of Tur, iv,

of

Mah Alta, daughter of Barzin,
vil, 53
married to Bahram Gur,
VILNI5S
Mah Azar, scribe, viii, 81
Mahan, [ranian noble, v, 260, 263
Mahbid (Mebodes), minister of
Kubad and Niushirwan,
158 ; vii, 213
instrumental in making
Nushirwan Shah, vii, 316
Nushirwan’s treasurer, vii,
319
sons of, vii, 319
serve Nushirwan’s meals,
vli, 319, 321
wife of, prepares Nushir-
wan’s food, vii, 321, 322
envied by Zuran, vii, 319
fall of, vii, 317, 322
Nushirwan’s repentance
with regard to, vii, 317,

325
Mah i-Azdda Kha, wife of Tur, i,
188
meaning of, i, 188 note
Mahiyar, minister of Dara,
murders Dara, vi, 52
tells Sikandar of the mur-
der, vi, 52
arrested by Sikandar, vi, 53
executed, vi, 56, 88
Mahiyar, franian noble, vii,
praises Bahram Gur, vii,
Mahiyar, a jeweller, 264, vii,
Sséq.
daughter of. See Arzu.
entertains Bahram Gur, vii,

38
38
55

59 seq.
Mahmid, Sultan (A.D. 999-
1030), 1, Loo; ii, 355);
viii, 24
account of, i, 21
brothers of, i, 21, 114
Firdausi’s praise of, 139,

P52) P55.) 50), LOOe LOT.
1; 2OuSe LD SPrie a ly

319
Mahmud—cont.
135 seq., 139; v, 30, 89,
BLN 2OMwV1-.2O, LOZ: 270;
ZO Zeus TOR AL, 27,7)". xs
122
Firdausi’s feeling against,

i, 33; vi,62, 92 seqg.and note
Satire on, i, 23, 40 seq.
alleged ill treatment by,
1,339.30: Sega ja Vil,eAST
alleged repentance of, i, 45;
iv, 8
occasion of, iv, 8
approves of Firdausi’s ver-
sion of the fight between
Rustam and Ashkabus,

lll, 109
remission of the land-tax by,
vi, 186, 208
| Mahraspand, father of Adarbad,
v, 16 note
Mahrwi, viii, 248
Mahwi (=Shahwi ?), one of
Firdausi’s authorities, i,
67; vii, 382
| Mahwi, Persian chief, 176, ix,

79, 745 89, 95, 97, ICO Seq.,
118

described, ix, 87
Farrukhzad entrusts Yaz-
dagird to, ix, 95
accepts charge of

dagird, ix, 96
becomes disaffected to Yaz-
dagird, ix, 96
writes to Bizhan, ix, 96, 116
betrays Yazdagird, ix, 97,
98, 116, 117
quest of, for Yazdagird, ix
100
has tidings of Yazdagird, ix,
IOL
consults his warriors, ix, 106
son of, counsels, ix, 107
receives Balkh and Harat,
Ens
governor of Marv, ix, 120
put to death with his
sons, ix, 120
sends miller to slay Yaz-
dagird, ix, 107, 116

Yaz-
320

Mahwi, sends troops after miller

with instructions, ix, 107

troops of, strip corpse of
Yazdagird, ix, 108

hears of death of Yazda-
gird, ix, 108

bids miller throw corpse of
Yazdagird into stream,
EOS

slays monks, ix, 113

consults his intimates and
minister, 1X, I13

advised by his minister, ix,
113

claims the throne on false
pretences, ix, I14

becomes master of Khura-
san, 1x, 114

evil rule of, ix, 114

makes war on Bizhan, ix,

II5

conduct of, to Barsam, ix,
117

crosses Oxus and camps at
Baigand, ix, 118

flees, ix, 118
overtaken by Barsam, ix,
118
captured by Barsam, ix, 119
put to death by Bizhan, ix,
120
Mai, city in Turkistan, i, 252,
250201) +) 1275, 2040
Vli, OI, 331, 385, 421
Mai, king of Hind, vii, 395, 396,
399, 401, 403, 404
Maidan, riding-ground, i, 83
Maidhy6-maungha, cousin and
first convert to Zarduhsht,
Vay 107)
Mail of Siyawush, iii, 58, 60, 61,
69, 81; iv, 40, 41, 44,
45, 5!
referred to, iv, 42, 43
Maishan (Mesene), a small state
on the lower Tigris, vi, 199
Majuj (Magog), 160. See Yajuj.
Makatura, Turkman chief, 173,
Vill, 317
dominates the Khan, viii,
318

GENERAL INDEX

| Makatura, slighted by the Khan,

viii, 318
challenges Bahram Cht-
bina, viii, 319
fight of, with Bahram Chu-
bina, viii, 320
Makh, viii, 71, 78
Makhzim, place, 93
Makna Bad, city, iii, 109
Makran (Gedrosia, Baluchistan),
country on the shore of
the Arabian Sea, ii, 80,
S2i ave ns 6. 2ORe 2g
22 A237 etSEY 25 4e sme
[62) 202, 39715) Vil; 300"
Vill, 393, 417
king of, 753, iv, 238 seq.
refuses facilities to Kai
Khusrau, iv, 239, 242
buried by Kai IKhusrau,
iv, 243
Kai Khusrau marches upon,
iv, 241
stops pillage of, iv, 243,
244
prepares a fleet in, iv, 244
sails for Gang-dizh from,
iv, 245
returns to, iv, 251
goes to Chin from, iv, 251
Alexander the Great’s re-
turn by, productive of
marvels, vi, 69
etymology of, vi, 69
Malcolm, Sir John, identification
and description of Mount
Sipand by, i, 236; v, 30
version of Suhrab by, ii,
118
on the scene of the death of
Bahram Gur, vii, 6
Malika, daughter of Tair, vi, 3,
324
legend of, vi, 323, 330 seq.
offers to betray her father’s
stronghold to Shapur, vi,

331

makes the garrison drunk,
vi, 333

opens the gate to Shapur,
vi, 333
GENERAL INDEX

Malika, goes to Shaptr’s camp,
vi, 333
Mamigonian, Armenian family,
vili, 188
Mamiun, Khalifa, i, 14; vii, 382,
43°
Man, the First (Gaiimart q.v.),
1,5
on the nature of, 139, i, 104
of Sigz (Rustam), ii, 100 and
note
Man, weight, i, 290 and note ;
viii, 148 and note, 314, 399
Manachihr, i, 206 note
Manda, nomads, i, 18
confused with the Mada
(Medes), i, 18; vi, 194
empire of the=empire of
the Medes, ii, 191
Mandane, daughter of Astyages,
li, 190
=Farangis in legend, ii, 191
Mandanes (Dandamis, Kait, Kai-
han, Kand, Kaid q.i'.), vi,
61
Onesicritus and, vi, 61
identical with Kaid, vi, 62
Mani, heresiarch, 163, ii, 19 note ;
v, 118 and note ; vi, 307;
vii, 188
account of, vi, 327
-gate, vi, 327, 359
teaching of, vi, 328
disputation of, with the high
priest, vi, 358
executed, vi, 359
Manicheism, ii, 19 note
Manizha, daughter of Afrasiyab,
150, iii, 285, 295 seq., 304,
308 seg., 348, 349
Bizhan and, Story of, 150,
iil)y-7, 12
historical basis of, iii, 11
Mohl on, iii, 285
Firdausi on, iii, 287
referred to, vili, 72
sends her nurse to Bizhan,
lil, 297
invites Bizhan to visit her,
iii, 298
drugs Bizhan, iii, 299

VOL. IX,

321

Manizha, wakes Bizhan in Afrasi-

yib’s palace, iii, 300

holds revel with Bizhan, 1ii,
300

disgraced, iii, 309

made Bizhan’s attendant,
ili, 310

referred to, iii, 318, 319

hears of the arrival of Rus-
tam’s caravan, iii, 337

interviews of, with Rustam,
ili, 337, 342

bears Rustam’s
Bizhan, iii, 340

kindles signal fire for Rus-
tam, ili, 344

receives gifts from
Khusrau, ili, 356

Manshur, Turanian hero, iii, 161,

165, 172, 182, 185, 199,
FOR ATOM 2 ase e205 21.
241, 251, 256

comes to the aid
Li; 5a

hears of the coming of Rus-
tam, ili, 175

ring to

Kai

of Piran,

_ Mansion of Gushtasp, Fire-tem-

ple, v, 75
Mansur bin Nuh, Samanid prince
(A.D. 961—976), i, 20, 21
Vier savily 5
Mantshan, a king in Pars, iv,
146, 180, 191
Manutshkihar (Minuchihr), i, 338
Manwis, viii, 253
Marathi, Scythian people, iv, 315
Marchlord, ill-disposed, —op-
presses Rai, 174, vili, 366
destroys gutters and cats,
Vili, 366
recalled, viii, 368

| Marcian (Batarun q.v.), vill, 41

Marco Polo, Venetian traveller
(A.D. 1254-1324), vi, 74
Mardanshah, (Yalan-sina 4.v.),
Vili 7A, 7G!) EK 55.0
son of, ix, 5, 6
conspires against Khusrau
Parwiz, ix, 6
mutilation and execution of,
ix, 6
x
322

Mardanshah (Mardasas), son of
Shirin, vili, 189, 191, 193,
196; 1x, 39
execution of, ix, 7
Mardas, father of Zahhak, Story
of, 140, i, 135 seq.
murdered by Zahhak, 1, 137
Mardasas. See Mardanshah.
Mardwi, Turanian hero, iii, 77
Mardwi, Persian official, viii, 21
Mardwi, gardener, vili, 397
Margh, city in Turkistan, 1, 256 ;
IVs 27 OM 2OA IE Vile OMNI
412, 421
Mark, birth. See Birthmark.
Marriage, next of kin (Khvaituk-
das), i, 60; ii, 189; v, 17
Mars; planet, i, 72, 276, 332, 339 3
ll, 247, 407 ; ill, I10, 159,

178, 318, 332; vii, 92,
252, 418; vill, 395; 1x,
73, 89

Martyropolis, ceded by Khusrau
Parwiz, viii, 188
Marusipand, palace, ix, II
Marit, angel, iii, 286
Marv, oasis and city in ancient
northern Khurasan, now
in Turkistan, 1273, i, 45;
Mi MONE Vi) AO, Aso), Henn.
263; vii, 174, 3573; Vili,
20, 93, 173, 336, 337, 346
S€q., 352, 350; ix, 70, 89,
116, 117
early seat of Aryan Civi-
lization, i, 7
as rhyme-word, vii, 88 note
Khan reaches, vii, 88
Bahram Gur marches on,
vii, 89
Azad Sarv finds Buzurj-
mihr at, vii, 283
traditional scene of Yaz-
dagird’s death, 1x, 70
Yazdagird at, ix, 97, 116
sage of, 1x, 110
apothegm of, ix, 110
conduct of Mahwi to Bar-
sam at, ix II7
Guraz, son of Mahwi, gov-
ernor of, ix, 120

GENERAL INDEX

| Marvell, quoted, viii, 399 note

| Marvrid (Murghab), river

in
Khurasan flowing into
and forming the Marv
Oasis, is 42285) iver 2555
Vill, 92

Mary, Maryam, mother of Jesus,
vili, 276 note, 277 note

_ Maryam, daughter of Cesar, 173,

I74, Vill, 188; 192, 276
MOLE 270 2 7OV mae AS
380,

murder of, vill, 193, 389
referred to, vili, 255, 266,
269, 270, 371, 381, 389
counselled by Cesar, viii,
279, 280

Niyatus put in charge of,
villi, 280

as peace-maker, viii, 310

_ Mashad, city in Khurasan, ii, 189
_ Mashya and Mashyoi, the off-

spring of Gaitmart, the

first man, 1, 117, 131
Masius, Mount, viii, 41
Massagetae, tribe, lli, 192

| Mas’udi, Arabic historian (died

A.D. 956), v, 293; vi, 62,
6371025 103,257 Lon Solos
vii, 3, 4, 6, 153, 280

version of the death of
Rustam by, v, 261

genealogies of Papak ac-
cording to, vi, 200

« Book of Indication and Re-
vision’ by, vi, 252

apologue of the owls by, vi,
310

parentage of Yazdagird son
of Shapur according to,
vi, 371

account of the fortifications
at Darband by, vii, 215

origin of the game of nard
according to, vii, 382

origin of the game of chess
according to, vii, 382

on Buzurjmihr, viit, 71

Maundeville, Sir John, vi, 13, 72
Maurice, Eastern Roman Em-

peror, viii, 187, 188
 

GENERAL INDEX

Maurice, helps Khusrau Parwiz
on terms, vili, 188
murder of, vili, 193
Mausil, Armenian prince, viii,
188, 189, 248, 282, 295
entertains Bandwi, vili, 249
Khusrau Parwiz and, viii,283
referred to, viii, 293 and
note
Ma wara ’u’n-Nahr (Kuhistan
q.v., Transoxania), ii, 19,
199; ili, 151
Maximian, Roman Emperor, viii,
188
Mayam, place, ili, 40, 41, 53, III
Mayors of the palace, Oriental, 1,
14
Mazaga, Indian city, vi, 65
taken by Alexander the
Great, vi, 65
Mazana (Mazandaran, q.v.), ii,28
Mazandaran, region lying be-
tween the Alburz range
and the Caspian, 143, 1,
4, 5, 12, 253, 279, 290,
294, 296, 298, 319, 323,
339, 378; ii, 25 seg., 33,
34, 36 seq., 45, 55, 60 seq.,
66 seq., 75, 79, 78, 81, 93,
105, 139, 143 Seq., 293,
Wi L4 4, O75 2075, 215;
222,243) 250; -200, 324,
3305 “iv, S67; £36; 206;
ZOO) 5118 LO; -1E7:. 203,
207 2200 W154 37733) oN;
215; vili, 48; ix, 74
approach to, from fran, ii
28
description of, ii, 2
king of, 143, ii, 39, 43, 54,
62 seq.
interview of, with Rus-
tam, ii, 67
fight of, with Rustam, ii,

transforms himself into a
rock, il, 74
death of, ii, 75
Mazandaranian, a native of, or
pertaining to, Mazan-
daran, ili, 320

| Mazda, Ahura,

323

See Ahura.

| Mazdak, heresiarch, 166, i, 63;

 

 

 

vii, 184, 185

disputation of, with Nushir-
wan, vii, 188, 206 seq.

account of, vii, 188, 201

becomes chief minister to
Kubad, vii, 201

influence of, over Kubdad,
Vil, 201

parable of, to Kubad in time
of drought, vii, 201

practical application of
Kubad’s reply by, vil,
202

converts Kubad, vii, 204
preaching and practice of,
vii, 204
attempt of, to convert Nush-
irwan, vii, 205
Kubad decides against, vil,
208
executed with his followers
by Nushirwan, vii, 208
Mazdakism, vii, 184
Mazdakites, vii, 184
great assembly of, vii, 205
massacre of, vii, 185, 208
Mebodes. See Mahbud.
Mecca, city, v, 31, 166; vi, 120;
1x, 69
Sikandar’s visit to, vi, 64,
I19Q seq.
account of, vi, 64
Medea, land of, i, 57
Mede, Medes (Mada), Aryan
people, i, 7, 10, 17, 56, 58,
72; vi, 194, 203
account of, i, 9
confused with the -Manda
(nomads), i, 18; vi, 194
empire of the=empire of
the Manda, i, 17; ii, I91

Media; iv; 315); vi, 315 v0;

Magna, vi, 201, 203, 256
vii, 214
Median, vi, 195
Median, language (Zend), i, 64
seq.
empire, li, 9; vi, 194
Mediterranean, the, vi, 294
32+

Megara, city in Greece, vi, 323
note

legend concerning, vi, 323

note

Megasthenes, Greek writer,
temp. Alexander the
Great, vi, 68

Meherdates (Milad), Parthian

prince, ili, 10 seq.
Memphis, Egyptian city, vi, 82
corpse of Alexander the
Great taken to, vi, 82
Merchant, a, 164
entertains arid displeases
Bahram Gur, vii, 39
made the slave of his own
apprentice, vli, 42
Merchants, franian, made acces-
sories to Bahram Gur’s
flight from Hind, vii, 133,
134
Mercury, planet, i, 72 ;. ili, 159,
213.5 V,243'5 Vig ij, 2245;
vill, 299, 395; 1X, 73
Meroe, island and city of, vi, 13,
65
Meru, mythical mountain, iv, 139
Mesopotamia, vi, 30, 294, 321
Arab invasions of, ili, 14
annexed by Arabs, ix, 68
Mesopotamian desert, vi, 322
Messiah, the, viii, 267
Mih-Azar-Gushnasp, minister of
Ardshir, son of Shirwi, in
Arabic Tabari, ix, 43
put to death, ix, 43
Mihr, month and day, i, 88, 89,

174, 175, 232; Vi, 24, 33,
Mihr, feast, ix, 40
Mihr, sacred Fire. See Mihr
Barzin.
Mihr Azar, priest, vii, 188, 206
assists Nushirwan in _ his
disputation with Mazdak,
Vli, 206

Mihr Barzin, sacred Fire and
Fire-temple, vi, 201, 212
and note

established by Gushtasp, v,
34

 

| Mihr-i-Nush,

GENERAL INDEX

Mihr Barzin, franian warrior,
temp. Bahram Gur, vii, 85
Mihr Bidad, franian magnate,
vii, 21
entertains Bahram Gur, vii,
22
Mihr ’Hasis, minister of Ardshir,
son of Shirwi, in Persian
Tabari, ix, 43
put to death, ix, 43
Mihr Hurmuzd, [ranian noble,
T75 5 Vill, LOG 1534
account of, ix, 5
referred to, ix, 6, 33
conspires against Khusrau
Parwiz, ix, 6
put to death, ix, 7
described, ix, 33
second son. of
Asfandiyar, ii, 3; v, 80,
283
slain by Faramarz, v, 227
death of, reported to Asfan-
diyar by Bahman, v, 227
corpse of, sent to Gush-
tasp, v, 232
Mihr-i-Nush, Persian sage, vii,
270
quoted, vii, 270

| Mihr-i-Nush, ix, 103

pleads with Mahwi for Yaz-
dagird, ix, 103
Mihr Narsi, chief minister of
Bahram Gur and of his
son Yazdagird, vii, 4, 153
sons of, vil, 4
Mihr Pirtiz, franian warrior,
temp. Bahram Gur, vii, 85
Mihrab, king of Kabul, 147, 142,
1, 2345 300d 2 rq. TO 20
visited by Zal, i, 256
tributary to Sam, i, 256
daughter of (Rudaba),i, 257,
V, 203
praises Zal to Sindukht, i,
260
hears from Sindukht of the
loves of Zal and Rutdaba,
1, 284
reproaches Rudaba, i, 289
Sam sent against, 1, 292
 

GENERAL INDEX

Mihrab, hears of Sam’s coming,
i, 292, 299
Mintchihr’s assent to
Zal’s marriage, i, 314
felicitates Sindukht, i, 315
Sindukht and, prepare to
welcome Sam and Zal, i,
314
entertain Sam and Zal, i,
317
visit Sam, i, 319
hears of the birth of Rustam,
1, 323
goes with Zal and Rustam
to meet Sam, 1, 324
parleys with Shamasas and
Khazarwan to gain time,
i, 358
writes to summon Zal, i, |

359
Mihrak, Tribal King, 761, vi, 3,
199, 237, 238, 257, 267,
268,270). 272, 2735, val,
185, 192
=Mithrak, vi, 206
slain by Ardshir Papakan,
vi, 241
daughter of, 267, vi, 3, 241,
256, 257, 208 seq., 272
escapes, vi, 241, 256, 268
referred to in  Kaid’s
prophecy, vi, 267
discovered by Shapur, vi,
268 seq.
informs Shaptr of her
birth, vi, 270
marries Shapur, vi, 270
birth of her son Urmuzd,
vi, 271
= Mithrak = Madik = Arda-
wan (?), vi, 256
importance of, in legend, vi,

257, 2075 Vill, 72, 73

Mibrak, servant of Nushirwan,
vili, 18 19
Mihran, Indian sage, 759,
91, 97
consulted by Kaid about
his dreams, vi, 92 seq.
interprets Kaid’s dreams,

vi,

 

vi, 94 Seq.

325

Mihran, family, vii, 156

importance of, vill, 72, 73

proverb on, vil, 185

account of, vii, 185

rivalry of, with family of
Karan, vii, 185

men of mark among the,
vii, 186, 187; viii, 74

Mihran, treasurer to Yazdagird

son of Shapur, vi, 387

| Mihran, franian general, vii, 251

commands the centre of
Nushirwan’s host, vil, 251

Mihran, archscribe, vili, 76

sent with Bahram Chubina,
Vili, 106

counsels Bahram Chubina,
Vili, 122 and note

seeks refuge, vill, 123

congratulates Bahram Chu-
bina, viii, 129

takes counsel with Kharrad,
vill, 159

flees from Balkh and is
tetaken, vill, 159

pardoned by Bahram Chu-
bina, viii, 160

referred to, vill, 163

speech of, vill, 166

| Mihran Sitad, franian high priest

and envoy, temp. Nushir-
wan, 168, vii, 186, 350,
361, 363 ; vili, 96, 100
attempt of the Khan to out-
wit, vii, 352
takes charge of the Khan’s
daughter, vil, 354
receives gifts from the Khan,

vii, 356

welcomed on his return, vii,
Sou

embassage of, referred to,
vill, 72, 97

sent for by Hurmuzd, viii, 97

tells of prophecy about
Bahram Chitbina, viii,
98, 216

death of, viii, 99
Mihran Sitad, merchant, enter-
tains Khusrau  Parwiz,
Vili, 251
326

Mihras, father of Ilyas ruler of
Khazar, iv, 352
Mihras, Cesar’s envoy, vii,
201
negotiates peace with Nush-
irwan, vil, 261
Mihrdat. See Meherdates.
Mihrgan, feast, i, 175 and note,
iv, 313; vi, 230 and note,
245
Mihrmas, vi, 200
Mil as rhyme word, i, 75
Milad, franian hero, iii, 11, 12,
25, 29, 145, 274, 289, 293,
345 5 iV; 83, 147, LOL 5 vi;
BOAT) Vill 282 LE
import of word, vii, 73
customs of, vill, 216
Milad (Taxila), Indian city, vi,
102, 109, IIo
situation of, vi, 62
Sikandar approaches, vi,
98
Military obsequies, temp. Nushir-
wan, vil, 252
Milk, bane of, vii, 125 and note,
324
easily “‘ turned,”’ vii, 317
poisoned by the Evil Eye,
Vli, 320 Seq., 324, 325
Mill, 776, ix, 89, 116
Miller, a, daughters of, 164
becomes Bahram Gur’s
father-in-law, vii, 34
dignified by Bahram Gur,
Vil, 34
Miller, a, 176, ix, 70
Yazdagird and, ix, 99
informs chief of Zark about
Yazdagird, 1x, 100
informs Mahwi about Yaz-
dagird, ix, 101
bidden to slay Yazdagird,
ree TROY,
fling corpse into stream,
1x, 108
Mingrelia, province on the east-
ern shore of the Black
Sea, vii, 215
Minister, piece in chess. See
Wazir.

 

 

GENERAL INDEX

| Minos, king of Crete, vi, 323 note

legend of, vi, 323 note

| Minu, viii, 253 and note

Mintchihr, Shah, 740-142, i, 42,.
gO, 9I, 209 seq., 274, 275,
319, 337, 339 seq., 348,
363 ; 11, 19, 29, 33, 36, 37,
302, 318, 400; ill, 9, 30,
87, “Ul'55) sv, 10; 905,09;
70, 76, 136, 206, 283, 285,
2083 Vy 12,174, 252; 25455
Vi ZOO, 35350 Vill 2,
223° 392 ix. LOS

birth of, i, 206

etymology of, i, 206 and
note, 234 and note

Faridun’s gifts to, i, 207

goes to fight Salm and Tur,
1, 206

makes proclamation to the |
host, i, 218

contends against Salm and -
Tis 209

prepares for a night-sur-
prise, i, 220

sends Tir’s head to Faridtn,
1222

sends Karan to take the
Castle of the Alans, i, 223
Seq.

hears of Karan’s success, 1,
225

defeats and slays Karkwi, i,
225 Seq.

pursues and slays Salm, i,
DT,

pardons Salm’s troops, i, 229

sends Salm’s head and a
letter to Faridtn, i, 229

return of, in triumph, i, 230

welcomed by Faridun, i, 230

confided to Sam by Faridun,
12

enthroned by Faridun, i, 232

mourning of, for, and burial
of, Faridun, 1, 233

Reign of, T41I, 1, 234 seq.
Note on, i, 234 seq.

accession and inaugural
address of, i, 237

Sam’s address to, i, 238
ee ee ee ee

ee

  

ee ae

    
      
  

GENERAL INDEX 327

Mintchihr, hears of Sam's find-
ing of Zal, i, 248
sons of, i, 248
sends Naudar to congratu-
late Sam, i, 248
summons Sam and Zal to
court, i, 249
Sam tells the story of his
quest to, i, 250
Zal’s horoscope taken by
order of, i, 251
gifts of, to Sam, i, 251
hears of the case of Zal and
Rudaba, i, 288
advises with the  archi-
mages, 1, 288
welcomes Sam, i, 289
hears of Sam’s campaign, i,
290
bids Sam destroy Mihrab
and his belongings, i, 292
receives Zal well, i, 306
consults the astrologers as to
Zal, i, 307
Zal proved by hard ques-
tions by order of, i, 308
Zal displays his accomplish-
ment before, i, 311
gracious reply of, to Sam, i,
314
warned of his death by the
astrologers, i, 335
counsels, and gives’ the
throne to, Naudar, i, 335
dies, 1, 336
Mintchihr, son of Arash, iv,
149
commands the troops from
Khurasan, iv, 148
slays Kuhila, iv, 181
commands the left, iv, 191
Mirin, Raman chief, 154
asks Czsar’s second daugh-
ter, Dilanjam, in marriage,
iv, 333
bidden by Cesar to slay the
wolf of Faskin, iv, 333
casts a horoscope, iv, 334
asks Hishwi to interest
Gushtasp in his behalf,

iv, 334

Mirin, provides Gushtasp with a
steed and arms, iv, 336
goes with Gushtadsp and
Hishwi to the forest of
Faskun, iv, 337
Hishwi and, welcome Gush-
tasp on his return, iv, 339
informs Cesar that he has
slain the wolf, iv, 341
marries Czesar’s daughter,
iv, 341
consulted by Ahran, iv, 342
refers Ahran to Hishwi, iv,
344
letter of, to Hishwi, iv, 344
Abran and, display their
accomplishment on the
riding-ground, iv, 349
Cesar’s wrath with, iv,351
sends a scornful message
to Cesar, iv, 353
set to guard the baggage,
iv, 355
Mir Khand (Mirkhond), Persi n
historian (A.D. 1433-
1498), v, 30; vi, 62, 315;
vli, 3, 4, 6, 156, 159, 171,
183, 186; vili, 192
distich of, quoted, ix, 56
Miskal, measure of weight, vi, 24
and note, vill, 394
| Misr (Egypt), 759, ii, 79, 80, 84,
94, 96, 143, 286; vi, 114,
Lj 22 VO. vill eos kr
king of temp. Kai Kaus, ii,

94, 95, 98
| king of, defeated by Sikan-
dar, -vi, 37
welcomes Sikandar, vi,
121
invaded by Sikandar, vi, 37,
121

sea of, vi, 120
Sikandar stays a year in, vi,
r27
| Mithra, Mitra, god, i, 7
Mithradat. See Meherdates.
| Mithrak, vi, 206
=Mihrak, vi, 206
= Mihrak = Madik = Arda-
wan (?), vi, 256
328 GENERAL INDEX

Mithrates. See Meherdates.
Mithradates I, Parthian king, ui,
80
Modes of speech, viii, 30
Mohl, Jules, his edition and
translation of the Shah-
nama, i, 76, 77; vi, 60
on the Story of Bizhan and
Manizha, ili, 285, 286
the Worm, vi, 203
Wisdom-literature, vii, 280
Mong, Indian city, vi, 18
Monks, ix, 109
find and recover corpse of
Yazdagird, ix, 109
lament over and entomb
Yazdagird, ix, 109 seq.
sentences of, over Yazda-
gird, ix, 109 seq.
slain by Mahwi, ix, 113
Monophysite, viii, 195
Moola Firooz, i, 201 note
Moon, one of the seven planets,
i, 72, Vill, 395
on the nature of the, 139, i,
205
phir st ae)
divided by Muhammad,
Vili, 42, 67
Moses, Hebrew law-giver, v, 294
Salt Fish and, legend of, vi,

Tel:
Faith of, vi, 95

Moses of Chorene, Armenian
historian (5th century
ASD) al 72.

account of Zahhak by, i, 144
Rustam by, 1, 236
Mosul, city in Mesopotamia, vi,

322
Mountain, mountains, sanctity
of, i, 118
of the Holy Questions, i,
62
—-skirt (Daman-i-Kuh), iii,
15, 91, 95

= Rakhsh, iii, 221, 251

Old man of the, v, 30

-—-sheep, personification of
the divine Grace, vi, 201,
221. See Ram.

_Mukaffa’.

 

Mu’awiya, Khalifa
679); teens
Mubid, i, 83
Mughira, son of Shu’ba. See
Shu’ba Mughira, ix, 69
Muhammad, the Prophet (about
A.D. 571-632), i, 13, 40,
Aili: ls S87 MO aN Oss
LOGO! 2O2Q 5 VVAllwA 2 OLE
ix, 69, 81 seq.
on ’Ali, i, 12, 106
praise of, i, 106
quoted, i, 106, v, 166
reference of, to Alexander
the Great in the Kuran,
VIF 15,42,
Muhammad, birth of, vii, 213
Nushirwan and, 170, viii,

(A.D. 661-

68

divides the Moon, viii, 42,
67

letter of, to Khusrau Par-
wiz, ix, 66

Flight of, referred to, ix, 122
Muhammad Kasim, Arab. gen-
eral, vi, 325
Muhammad Laskari, friend of
Firdausi, i, 99; ili, 286
Muhammad Mahdi, his edition
of the Shahnama, i, 76
Muhammad, son of Abdu’r-Raz-
zak, i, 68, 99
Muhammadan, Muhammadans,
vi, 78 ; viii, 73
elements in Shahnama, viii,
42
ethics respected, viil, 74
See Ibn Mukaffa’.
Multan, city in the Punjab, vii,
140
monarch of, entertained by
Bahram Gur, vii, 140
Mumasenni, tribe, i, 237
Munzir, al, dynasty of, 1, 55
Munzir, prince of Hira, temp.
Yazdagird son of Shapur
and Bahram Gur, 1763,
164, Vi, 372, 394, 400,
408 ; vii, 9
visits Yazdagird, vi, 377
monarch of Yaman, vi, 378
 

GENERAL

Munzir, returns to Yaman with

Bahram, vi, 378

chooses nurses for Bahram,
vi, 378

dismisses Bahram’s tutors,
vi, 380

provides Bahram Gur with
steeds, vi, 380

provides Bahram Gur with
slave-girls, vi, 381

goes to the chase with Bah-
ram Gur, vi, 384

sends a picture of Bahram
Gur shooting to Yazda-

gird, vi, 385

sends Bahram Gur with
Nu’man to Yazdagird, vi,
386

receives a letter from Yaz-
dagird, vi, 387

counsels and sends Bahram
Gur a slave-girl and pre-
sents, vi, 388

welcomes Bahram Gur on
his return, vi, 390

supports Bahram  Gur’s
claim to the throne, vi,
396 seq.

invades [ran, vi, 397

interview of, with Jawanwi,
vi, 398 seq.

refers Jawanwi to Bahram
Gur, vi, 398

advises Bahram Gutr_ to
negotiate with the f[ran-
lams, vl, 401, 404

intercedes with Bahram Gur
for the [ranians, vii, 10

rewarded by Bahram Gur,
vii, 10

Munzir, son of Nu’man, prince of

Hira, temp. Nushirwan,
167, vii, 244 seq.

protected by Nushirwan,
vil, 217

war of, with Harith
Jabala, vii, 217

sent by Nushirwan to invade
Rum, vii, 246

Murdad, ameshaspenta, i, 88;

ili, 287, 328

bin

INDEX 329

Mush, town west of Lake Van,
viii, 188

Mushkinab, a miller’s daughter,

 

vil, 32 and nole
taken to wife by Bahram
Gur, vii, 33
Mushkinak, a miller’s daughter,
vii, 32 and note
taken to wife by Bahram
Gur, vii, 33
Muslim, ix, 85
Mutawakkil, Khalifa (A.D. 847-
861), i, 14
Cypress of Kishmar
stroyed by, v, 28
Mutilation, instances of, vi, 261,
323, 334, 348, 357, 404
Mytilene, Chares of, Greek writer,
temp. Alexander the
Great, li, 10; vi, 61
quoted, iv, 314

de-

N
NABARZANES, Persian general, vi,

32
pardoned by Alexander the
Great, vi, 32
Nadir, Shah, iii, 14
Nadr son of Harith, v, 166
recites the story of Rustam
and Asfandiyar, v, 166
fate of, v, 166
Nahavand, city, south of Hama-
dan, i, 12; ix, 68, 69
Yazdagird concentrates his
forces at, 1x, 68
Battleof, 1,012) 5 1, 69

Nahid (Katayun, q.v.)

Nahid (Halai, Olympias ?),
daughter of Failakus and
mother of Sikandar, 159,
vi, 24 seq., and note

married to Darab, vi, 25

troubled by offensive
breath, vi, 26

cured, but repudiated. by
Darab, vi, 26

returns to Failakis and
gives birth to Sikandar,
vi, 26
339

Nahid, visits Dilarai and Rusha-

nak, vi, 89
referred to, vi, 187

Nahid, the planet Venus, vi, 214

Nahrawan, city near Baghdad,
east of the Tigris; also a
canal on the eastern bank
of that river, quitting it
about 100 miles above,
and rejoining it about 100

miles below, Baghdad,
Vile LAT s) vail) uO, ZO4,
206, 231

bridge of, viii, 223, 228 seq.
broken down by Khusrau
Parwiz, vili, 229

Naishapur. See Nishapur.
Naitkin (Antigonus), minister
of Sikandar, name of,

assumed by Sikandar, vi,

66, 125 seq.

personates Sikandar, vi, 125
seq.

Kaidrish and his wife

brought before, vi, 126
sentenced to death by, vi,

126
pardoned by, vi, 126
—Sikandar, vi, 131, 133,
134, 141

Nakula, one of the five Pan-
davas, iv, 138
referred to, iv, 139
Names, use of, in sympathetic
magic, 1, 8, 177, 179
secret and public, viii, 372

and note
Namkhast, Turanian hero, v, 24,
20
goes as envoy to Gushtasp,
V, 37, 40
returns with Gushtasp’s

answer, V, 44
given command of the cen-
tre, v, 56
worsted by Girami, v, 59
Napata, city in Nubia, vi, 65
Naphtha, 759, 1, 56
black, iv, 208, 209
use of, in sieges, iv, 208,
209

|

|

 

 

GENERAL INDEX

Naphtha, Sikandar’s iron steeds
filled with, 159, vi, 115
Fur’s elephants and troops
routed by the use of, vi,
116
used to vitrify Sikandar’s
barrier, vi, 165
Nard, game of, 169, viii, 371
invention of, vii, 280, 381,
382, 389
sent by Nushirwan to the
Raja of Hind, vii, 5, 381
meaning of, vii, 381
symbolism of, vii, 381
Mas’udi on, vii, 382
described, vil, 389
Nariman, [ranian hero, father of
Sam and _ great-grand-
father of Rustam, 1, 42,
174, 207, 212, 239, 299,

333, 344; WW, 4, 49, IIS,
TLOWL25.2 20, TO2Z3540;
Lin 1734355 V; £90, £99;
202, 242, 262, 264, 266,
289

death of, described, i, 329
Narimanau, epithet of Kere-
saspa, 1, 172, 174

| Narmpai, name of a tribe, 160,

ii, 55 and note, 63, 64; Vi,
71 and note
Sikandar and, vi, 150

Narses (Narsi, son of Bahram,

g.v.), Sasanian king
Narses, Exarch, treatment of, by

Empress Sophia, viii, 76
Narses, general, vili, 189

| Narsi, Ashkanian king, Vi EOZ,

210
Narsi, son of Bahram, Shah
(Narses), 162, vi, 3, 313,
316, 325, 330, 331, 337;
vul, 359
Reign of, vi, 315 seq.
Note on, vi, 315
title of, vi, 315
inaugural address of, vi, 315
daughter of, 162. See
Nusha.
Narsi, brother of Bahram Gur,
165, vi, 3; Vu, 4, 95, 100
 

GENERAL INDEX

Narsi, made captain of the host,

Vil, II
regent, vii, 86

fails to persuade the fran-
ians to resist the Khan,
vii, 87

Bahram Gur’s letter to, vii,
Q2

writes to Bahram Gur on
behalf of the [ranians, vii,

94
goes with the chiefs to wel-
come Bahram Gur, vii, 96
made ruler of Khurasan,
vii, 99
welcomes his brother on his
return from Hind, vii, 137
Narwan, forest of, near Tammisha
Ga eae Or ie 3A hy
Vili, 356, 360, 377; 1x, 86
Nasibin (Nisibis, g.v.), vi, 326
cession of, vi, 355
inhabitants of, refuse to
submit to Shapur, vi, 356
taken by Shapur, vi, 356
Nasiru’d-Din, title of Subuk-
tigin; q:U:, 1,20, LOO; 114
Nasr, Amir, brother of Sultan
Mahmud, i, 21 ; vi, 196
account of, i, 100
referred to, i, 114
praise of, i, 114; vi, 207
Nasr, Arab chief, vi, 65
appeals to Sikandar for
help, vi, 120
made ruler of Mecca, vi, 121
Nasr, son of Ahmad, Samanid,
vii, 340
patron of Ridagi, vii, 383
Nastar, Cesar’s master of the
herds, iv, 325
refuses to employ Gushtasp,
iv, 326
Nastihan, Turanian hero, son of
Wisa and brother of
Piran, £40, 252, 1,92). 0,
204%; Wil, 70) 190, 210,230,
DEQ AV; mG swSGGe, WOL,. 755
Th
pursues Kai

377 Seq:

Kkhusrau, ii,

33%

Nastihan, slain by Bizhan, iv,

54

Nastth, franian hero, ii, 4; iii,
46; iv, 148
| Nastth, Tuiranian hero, iv, 156
_ Nastuth, son of Mihran Sitad, 173,
. Vili, 225, 303
advises Hurmuzd, viii, 96
| released by Bahram Chtu-
bina, vill, 306
| Nastur (Basta-vairi, Bastvar),
son of Zarir, 155, v, 12,
25, 26
exploits of, foretold by
| Jamasp, v, 50
given command of the rear,

V5, 55
fights victoriously, v, 60

goes in search of Zarir, v, 67
finds Zarir’s corpse and
| laments over it, v, 67
exhorts Gushtasp to avenge
Zarir, v, 68
goes forth with Gushtasp’s

steed and armour, v, 69
challenges Bidirafsh, v, 69
fights with Bidirafsh, v, 70
| attacks, with Asfandiyar and

Nush Azar, the Turan-
ians, v, 71
| leads the host home, is
given a command, and
invades Turan, v, 74
stationed on the Iranian

left, v, 94
commands the right, v,-109
Nastur, son of Shirin and

| Khusrau Parwiz, ix, 39

Nature-worship, of the Aryans,
Lak
Nau-Ardshir=Nard, vii, 381
Naubahar, Fire-temple at Balkh,
31
Luhrasp retires to, v, 31
Naudar, Shah, 142, i, 90, 91,
369 ; ii, 20, 36, 70, 153,
336, 400, 404; lii, 8, 24,
30, 50; 57,07, 36, X12,
M23 DSS 77a LO7s ely
257, 280, 294,327; 15
TS 5G1.).70; 1575 107, 176,

 
332

Naudar—cont.
I9QI, 193, 206, 237, 254,
ZO2 7 ZO wavill,, 3 i7nee7lee
Vili, 223, 242
embassies of, to Sam, i, 248,
288
returns with Sam to court, i,
289
counselled by Mintchihr and
appointed his successor, i,
335
laments for Minutchihr, i,
336
Reign of, 142, i, 337 seq.
Note on, i, 337
accession of, 1, 339
evil rule of, i, 339
revolts against, i, 339
appeals to Sam, i, 339
the chiefs reconciled to,
by Sam, i, 341
rewards Sam, 1, 342
marches against Afrasiyab
to Dahistan, i, 345
battles of, with Afrasiyab,
i, 348 seq.
takes counsel with Karan,
i, 349
defeated, i, 350, 353
sends Tus and Gustaham
to conduct the Persian
women to Alburz, 1, 351
beleaguered in Dahistan, i,
353
escapes from Dahistan, i,
355
pursued and taken by Afra-
s1yab, 1, 355
slain, i, 363
the [ranians bewail, i, 364
Naurtiz, Persian New-year’s day
when the sun enters Aries,
vi, 33, 55, 273, 389; viii,
216
Nawand, place in Khurdsan on
the Binalid Kuh (?), ii,
107
Naztab, a miller’s daughter, vii,
32 and note
taken to. wife by Bahram
Gur, vii, 33

GENERAL

 

INDEX

Nearchus, admiral of Alexander
the) Greatjsvilet2, 65, 70
Ichthyophagi, account of
by, quoted by Arrian, vi,
69, 70
Nectanebus II (Nekht-neb-f),
the last Pharaoh
personates Amen-Ra_ and
becomes the legendary
father of Alexander the
Great, vi, 16
story of, vi, 18 and note

| Need, personification of. See
Greed.
Negroes, the, described, vi, 73,
157

cause frost and snow to
harm Sikandar, vi, 156,

157
Nekht-neb-f. See Nectanebus.
Nereis. See Kalé.

| Nero, Roman emperor (A.D. 54-

68), vii, 279

| Néryésang, ii, 82

Nestorian, Nestorians, vill, 195
Metropolitan, vil, 219
Patriarch, vii, 219

New Year, Persian, beginning of,

i, 74, 88
Feast of (Nauriz, New
Years Day), 1, 745 2745
vii, 94, 200
origin of, i, 133
Nicaea, Indian city, vi, 18
Nicephorium (Callinicus, Kalini-
yus q.v., Warigh, Rakka),
vill, 188
Nicolaus of Damascus, Greek
historian temp. Augustus,
vi, 195
Nil, as rhyme-word, i, 75
Nile, 1; 40,71, 114, 297; 11,96;
153) 27s. 310, 402: sat
38, 41, 58, 208, 224, 225;
LVeeLASeSeg., LOO, 380s
176, 188, 191, 245; vi, 42,
TOO) W171, 2005) wile op
250, 344, 416; vill, 126,
284, 293, 294 ; 1x, 98
Blue, vi, 65
mistaken for Indus, vi, 68
 

GENERAL INDEX

Nimruz=Sistan = Zabulistan,' i,
252, 264, 346, 357; ii, 21,
34, 69, 77, 80, 84, 338,
395 > Wi, 07, 35, 300m ay.
156, 188; v, 85, 248, 288 ;
vil, 327; viii, 196, 284;
ix, 5, 6
confirmed to Rustam by Kai
Khusrau, iv, 297
Zal by Luhrasp, iv, 312
Sikandar marches to, vi, 175
satrapy of, ix, 69
Nineveh, viii, 193
fall of, i, 10
kings of,
Iran, i, 10
battle near, vili, 194
Ninus, mythical founder of
Nineveh, v, 292, 293
Ninyas, son of Ninus, v, 293
Niris, salt lake in Pars, vi, 17
referred to, vi, 21
Nisa, city (Muhammadabad ?)
in IKhurasan or town in
Ktirman, vii, 89; viii, 19
Nishapur, city in Khurasan,? i,
30,45 yom lve 255);
V5029:Seg—, 2OL > Vi, 298;
Vili, 173; ix, 95
Nisibis (Nas‘bin q.v.), city in
northern Mespotamia, i,
374
sieges of, i, 374, Viii, 41
peace of, vi, 254
cession of, by Jovian, vi, 326
by Khusrau Parwiz (?),
vili, 188
Nisus and Scylla, story of, vi,
323 note
Nitetis, vi, 16
Nivzar, son of Gushtasp, 155, v,
26
death of, foretold by Jam-
asp, v, 50
slain, v, 60

that attacked

BK]
| Niyatis (Theodosius, son of
Maurice), 173, viii, 189,

281, 289; 1x, 2
brother of Casar, vili, 280,

310
put in charge of Maryam,
vii, 280

welcomed by Khusrau Par-
wiz, viii, 280

wroth with Khusrau Par-
WiZ, vill, 290

watches fight between Khus-
rau Parwiz and Bahram
Chubina, viii, 297

entertained at banquet by
Khusrau Parwiz, viii, 309

quarrel of, with Bandwi,
Vili, 309

 

threat of, to Khusrau Par-
wiZ, Vili, 310
reconciled to Bandwi, viii,
a
returns to Rum, viii, 312
Nizami, Persian poet, vill, 192
Nizami-i-’Aruidi, Persian writer
(12th century A.D.), 1,

23
account of Firdausi by, i, 38
Seq., 45, 46
No6ldeke, Professor, v, 20, 21,

282; vi, 198 note, 199 and
note, 253, 313, 372; viii,
TR BOS

on the div Akwan, iii, 271

quoted, v, 118

treatise of, on the Alexander

 

Romance, efc., vi, 14 and
note

on the Story of the Worm,
vi, 203, 205, 200

on Haftwad, vi, 206

on the Gipsies, vii, 6

on Stfarai, vii, 171, 185

on Wisdom-literature,
281

vil,

1 Properly speaking, Zabulistin is the name of the hilly country about the

upper waters of the

Helmund, while

Nimruz and Sistaén are synonymous

nam s for the low lying lands into which iis waters descend, but Firdausi does not

seem to make any such distinction.

* The city has suffered much in the past from the ravages of war and earth-
quake and has becn rebuilt scyeral times on slightly varying sites,
334

Noldeke, on Romance of Bahram
Chubina, vili, 73
North, Sir Thomas (A.D. 1535-
1603 ?), vii, 383
version of the Fables of
Bidpai by, vil, 383
Northman, the, vi, 19
found the Russian empire,
vi, 19
Note on Pronunciation, preced-
ing text in each volume
Nubia, vi, 65
Nth bin Nasr, Samanid prince
(A.D. 942-954), vil, 5
Nth II. bin Manstr, Samanid
prince (A.D. 976-997), 1,
2s One Vee
Nu’man, prince of Hira, 163,
164, Vi, 372, 396, 404
visits Yazdagird, vi, 377
goes to the chase with Bah-
ram Gur, vi, 384
goes to the Persian court

with Bahram Gur, vi,
386
returns to Yaman_ with
letters and presents, vi,
387

welcomes Bahram Gtr on
his revisiting Yaman, vl,
390
invades fran, vi, 397
rewarded by Bahram Gur,
vil, IO
Nu’man bin Munzir, prince of
Hira, vill) 1883 05
put to death, vili, 190
Nu’man, Arab general, ix, 68
sent by ’Umar to fight
Yazdagird, 1x, 68
defeats Pirizan at Naha-
vand, ix, 68
slain, ix, 69
Nurse, Manizha’s, ili, 297
interview of, with Bizhan,

iii, 297
Nusha (Dukhtntsh), daughter of
Narsinn 262 mavie Smeg Z4.
331
carried off by the Arabs, vi,
323, 330

GENERAL

 

INDEX

Nush Azar, Fire-temple at
Balkh, v, 92 note, 173,
241, 255

burnt by the Turkmans, v,

93
Nush Azar, youngest son of

Asfandiyar, ii, 3, v, 166,

283, 285

attacks, with Nastur and
Asfandiyar, the Turanian
host, v, 71

builder of a Fire-temple, v,
81

with Asfandiyar at Gum-
badan, v, 98
informs Asfandiyar of Jam-
asp’s arrival, v, 98, 99
accompanies Asfandiyar
from Gumbadan, v, 103
slays Turkhan, v, 151
wrangles with Zawara, v, 226
slays Alwa, v, 226
slain by Zawara, v, 227
death of, reported to Asfan-
diyar by Bahman, v, 22
corpse of, sent to Gushtasp,
Vv, 232
Nushirwan (iisra, Chosroes 1),
Shah, 1266-170, i, 27, 42;
v, 260; vi, 3, 201; vil, 4,
199, 220, 273 Seq., 279 Seq-,
3201s eVill, 93° SEG: 97 En ee
86 seq., 98, 129, 169, 108,
200, 205, 209, 300, 312,
ZE3e S70) LS 22,720 le
80, 92, 105, 109, 110, I19
collector of Iranian tradi-

tion; 1, .07
quoted, vi, 208, 209 and
note

origin of name, vii, 155,
and note

birth of, stories of, vii, 186,
197 seq.

assistants of, against Maz-
dak, vii, 188, 206

upbringing of, vii, 200

Mazdak’s attempt to con-
vert, vii, 205

disputation of, with Maz-
dak, vil, 206 seq.

211
Nushirwan,

 

GENERAL

Kubad decides in
favour of, vii, 208
executes Mazdak and _ his
followers, vii, 208
Kubad’s testament in favour
of vii, 210, 316
Reign of, 167, vii, 212 seq.
Notes on, vii, 212 seg., 279
Seq-, 316 seq., 380 seq.,
Vili, 3 seq., 41 seq.
Roman Emperors contem-
porary with, vii, 212
historical events of reign of,
in the Shahnama, vii, 213
marriage of, with the daugh-
ter of the Khan vii, 347,
seq.
referred to, viii, 72, 97 seq.
wats of, with Rum, vii, 213,
217
first campaign of, vii, 218,
Cees .
conspiracy against, vii, 214,
316
division of empire by, vii,
ZU ALI 22 Ags KOO
bargains of, with Justinian,
vil, 214, 216 seq.
taxation 1eformed by, vii,
215, 224
wall of, in the Caucasus, 167,
i, 16; vil, 215, 239
Mas’tdi’s account of, vii,
215
dealings of, with the Alans,
vli, 216
Gilan, vii, 216
Balichis, vii, 217
Munzir supported by, vii,
217, 244
and consequent war with
Rum, vii, 217, 244
jealous of Justinian’s suc-
cesses in the West, vii,
27
promises to rule justly, vil,
221 seg.
attends muster at the insist-
ence of Babak, vii, 231
approves of Babak’s con-
duct, vii, 232

INDEX 335

Nushirwan, method of, in levying

troops, vil, 233
writes to Caesar on Munzir’s
behalf, vii, 245
supplies Munzir with troops
for the invasion of Rum,
vii, 246
goes to Azar Abadagan, vii,
250
disposition of host by, vii,
251
addresses his troops, vii, 251
proclamations of, vil, 252,
365
burial of dead soldiers by,
Vil, 252
policy of, with enemies, vii,
253
takes Shurab, vii, 254
Arayish-i-Ruim, vii, 255
Caesar’s tieasures, vil,
255, 258
defeats Farfurius, vil, 256
takes Antakiya, vil, 258
disposes of the Ruman cap-
tives, viJ, 259, 327
Ruman cordwainer and, vi.
260
envoy from Caesar comes
to, vii, 261
grants peace to Caesar, vii,
262
appoints Shirwi to receive
the Ruman tribute, vil,
262
Christian wife of, vii, 263
mother of Nushzad, vii,
263, 274 seq.
helps Nushzad, vii, 266
laments for Nushzad, vil,
276
imprisons Nushzad, vii, 264
illness and reported death
of, vii, 264, 265
hears of Nutishzad’s revolt,
vii, 266
instructs Ram Barzin how
to act, vii, 267 seq.
Seven Banquets of 168, vii,
280, 287 seq.
possiple origin of, vii, 280
336

GENERAL INDEX

Nishirwan, Seven Banquets of,

Buzurjmihr’s discourses
at, vil, 287 seq.

dream of, vii, 282

consults the archmages, vil,
282

seeks for a dream-interpre-
ter, vii, 282

dieam of, interpreted by
Buzurjmihr, vii, 284

rewards and honours Bu-
zurjmihr, vii,286, 289, 304,
311, 315

relations of, with Singibu,
vii, 317
the Haitalians, vii,*317
with Mahbiud and his sons,

Vlil, 319 seq.

suspects Zuran, vil, 324

greatness of, vii, 327

buildings of, vii, 327

embassy of Khan to, vil, 329

consults the chicfs as to
Faghanish, the Khan, and
the Haitalians, vii, 333

1eply of chiefs to, vil, 334

rejoinder of, to chiefs, vii,
336

prepares for war with the
Khan, vii, 337
writes to his chiefs, the
Khan, and Faghanish,
vii,

marches from Mada’in, vii,
337,

goes to Gurgan, vii, 337

receives embassy from the
Khan, vil, 339

holds a court, vii, 340

displays his prowess before
the assembly, vii, 341

dismisses the Khan’s envoy
with a letter, vii, 344

Khan’s offer of affinity to,
Vii, 347

reply of, vii, 349

occupies territory evacuated
by the Khan, vii, 358

Haitalians and others bring
gifts to, vil, 360, 362

gives praise to God, vii, 361

 

 

| Nushirwan, 1eceives the tiikute

from Rum, vii, 362

goes to the temple of Azac-
gashasp, vii, 363

greatness of, vii, 364

questions Buzurjmihr, vii,
307 seq.

receives the game of chess
from Hind, vu, 380, 385

Raja of Hind’s embassy to,
Vii, 384

rewards Buzurjmihr for dis-
coveling how to play
chess, vii, 388

sends Buzurjmihr with pre-
sents and the game of
nard to Hind, vii, 390

proposes wager with the
Raja, vii, 391
welcomes Buzurjmihr on

his return from Hind, vii,
393

acquires the Book of Kalila
and Dimna, vii, 423 seq.

sends gifts to the Raja, vii,
425

rewards Barzwf, vii, 429

precautions of, as to suc-
cessor, viil, 3

goes hunting with Buzurj-
mihr, villi, 4

suspects and = disgraces
Buzurjmihr, vill, 5

treats Buzurjmihr with in-
creasing 1igour, viii, 7, 8

reconciled to Buzurjmihr,
vill, 9

questioned by archimages,
Vili, 14 seq., 28 seq.

gives judgment against his
Own son, villi, 16

chief cook of, aggrieved, viii,
18

counsels Hurmuzd, viii, 2:
seq.

writes to console Caesar’s

son and successor, vill,
43 B
wroth at answer received,

vill, 45

invades Rum, viii, 46
GENERAL INDEX 337

Nushirwan, success of, viii, 47. | Nushzdd, goes to fight with Ram

checked, viii, 47 Barzin, vii, 272

in want of money, viii, 47 exhorted to yield by Piruz,

takes counsel with Buzurj- vil, 273
mihr, viii, 47 reply of, to Piruz, vii, 274

refuses advances from a | wounded, vil, 275
shoemaker, vili, 50, 71 repents, vii, 275

high esteem of, for scribes, sends message to his mothez,
vili, 50 vil, 275

grants peace to, and takes | dies, vii, 275
tribute from, the Rimans,. lamentation for, vii, 276
vili, 52 Firdausi’s reflections on, vii,

returns to Taisaftin, viii, 53 276

sons of, viii, 56, 63
instructs Buzurjmihr_ to

 

prove Hurmuzd, viii, 56 | O
seq.
testament of, in favour of, | Oasis oF AMMON, vi, 65
and last counsels _ to, Alexander the Great’s visit
Hurmuzd, viii, 61 seq, ; ix, to, vi, 65
22 | Oblivion, Castle of, vii, 184
directions of, as to inter- | Obsequies, military, in the time
ment, viii, 65 of Nushirwan, vii, 252
hall of, shattered, viii, 68 Oceanus, Homeric and Oriental,
death of, vili, 69, 71 70
system of administration of, | Odatis, Scythian princess, iv, 315
VAN 7a legend of, iv, 315
ministers of, put to death by | Odenathus, Arab chief, vi, 222
Hurmuzd, viii, 81 seq. Shapur son of Ardshir and,
choice of Hurmuzd by, story | vi, 294, 325
of, viii, 87 confused with Valerian, vi,
palace of, viii, 193 324 seq.
dream of, ix, 92 Odorico, Minorite Friar and tra-
Yish Zdd=Mihr-i-Nush, q¢.v., | veller (A.D. 1286-1331),
v. 285 and note vi, 13
Nushzad, father of Mihrak, | Old Man of the Mountain, the, v,
Wily 237) N24 207) 270" 30
273 Olives, taxes on, vil, 215, 22

Nushzad, son of Nushirwan, | Olympias (Nahid, Halai ?), wife
167, ‘vii, 213, 265, seq. of Philip of Macedon and

historical account of, vii, 219 | mother of Alexander the
Firdausi’s account of, vii, | Great

263 seq. legendary relations of, with
education of, vii, 263 Nectanebus, vi, 16, 18
imprisonment of, vii, 264 choice by, of name for her
hears report of Nushirwan’s son, vi, 19

death, vii, 265 intrigues of, vi, 82
revolts, vii, 266 | Omartes, Scythian chief, iv, 315
helped by his mother, vii, | legend of, iv, 315

266 Omen, ii, 192, v, 177
writes to Caesar, vii, 266 of the quince, ix, 13, 14

VOL. IX, 4

 
338

Omphis, Indian king, vi, 62
Onager, the div Akwan as, iil,
273 seq.
Bahram Chubina guided by,
Vili, 156, 158
Onesicritus, chief pilot of Alex-
ander the Great and
writer, vi, 67
untrustworthy, vi, 12, 61, 67
Fakirs and, vi, 61
Calanus and, vi, 61
Mandanes and, vi, 61
Onnes, minister of Ninus, v, 292,
293
Ordeal by fire, ii, 218 seq.
Ormus (Hurmuz), city on the
Persian Gulf, vi, 204
Osrhoene, kingdom in northern
Mesopotamia, vi, 198
Othello, play of, quoted, vi, 324
Owls, Mas’udi’s apologue of the,
vi, 310
and Crows, story of, vill, 263
and note
Ox, the first, i, 5
legend of the, i, 117, 236
Ox of Kai Kats, ii, 26
Ox-hide, or skin, filled with gold

as tribute, v, 265 and
note; vii, 262, 363; viii,
46, 52, 53

Oxus (Jihun, q.v.), river, i, 57;
Tin LOO Aves E 2529s EVAL:
T5O, SEG ville 72
ancient trade-route, i, 57
confused with Aras, i,
370
change in course of, i, 57
note, ili, 10
referred to, ix, 117 and note,
118
Oxyartes, father of Roxana
(Rushanak), wife of Alex-
ander the Great, vi, 32

71,

12

Padashkvar, a mountain or sec-
tion of the Alburz range,
i, 338

GENERAL
| Page,

INDEX

of Nushirwan,
seq.
relative of Buzurjmihr, viii,

Vili, 5

5
instructed by Buzu1jmihr,
viii, 6
takes messages between
Nushirwan and Buzurj-
mihr, viil, 6 seq.
Pahlav, region, ii, 77, 102; iii,
222,
Pahlavan, i, 83; vi, 194
Pahlavi, middle Persian language
of Ashkanian (Parthian)
and Sasanian times, vii,
6, 113, 188, 380 seq. ; viii,
73, 743 ix, 50
meaning of, i, 64, 83
Firdausi’s use of the word,
i, 69
Fables of Bidpai translated
into, vii, 382
language (middle Persian),
Vi 0242 20, 6d; LOA
texts) 115, 27)5 jv, 13; 245) 245
30, ; vi, 195, 196, 257
version of the Pseudo-Callis-
thenes, vi, 14, 16, 84
writing and reading, con-
fusion in, vi, 14, 62, 205,

206

' Paidawasi, Persian coin—five
dinars, vii, 95 and note,
vill, 381 and note; ix,

| 19

| Paighit=Turanian, v, 13, 21
note, 38 note, 41 note, 44
note; vili, 190

Paikar-i-Gurd, melody, viii, 398
and note

Pairika. See Pari.

Palace of Jewels, 160

| Paladins, 154

Palashan, Turanian hero, I47,

i126.) 79 .
surveys the franian host,
li, 69

slain by Bizhan, iii, 70
Palawina (Cappadocia), vi, 294,
297, 298
Palestine, vi, 30
 

GENERAL INDEX

Palladius, bishop, vi, 61, 62
treatise of, on the Brah-
mans, vi, 61
interpolated into the
Pseudo-Callisthenes, vi,
61
Palmyra, city in Syrian desert,
vi, 294, 322, 324; vii, 217
Palus Maeotis (Sea of Azoff), vi,

73
Pandavas, the five, iv, 138, 139
pilgrimage of, compared
with that of Kai Khusrau
and his paladins, iv, 138
Pand Namah, of Moola Firooz, i,
201 note
Pandnamak-i Vadshorg-Mitré-i
Bukhtakan, Pahlavi text,
vil, 279
Pandu, Indian king, iv, 316
Papak, Tribal King, 160, vi, 3,
194, 195,198 seg., 211
note and seq., 227, 252,
254, 250; vili, 214, 219
and note, 285
Sasan and, vi, 212
daughter of, marries Sasan,
160, vi, 213
mother of Ardshir Papa-
kan, viii, 214
Ardawan’s letter to, vi, 214
dies, vi, 218
kindred of, support Ardshir
Papakan, vi, 223 seq.
Papakan Ardshir. See Ardshir
Papakan.
Parable, Mazdak’s, vii, 201
Paradise Lost referred to, vi, 71
Pari!-1,/53,) 172
Paris, city, MSS. of the Pseudo-
Callisthenes in National
Library at, vi, 14
Parmiuda (see too Khan of Chin),
170, 171, viii, 75, 117, 130,
136 seqg., 146, 149 seq., 164,
174
hears of Bahram Chubina’s
victory and takes counsel,
vlil, 131
marches toward Jihwn, viii,
131

Soe

Parmida, approaches’  Balkh,
vill, 134
attacks and is defeated by
Bahram Chubina, viii,
134 seq.
escapes to Awaza, viii, 138
besieged by Bahram Chu-
bina, viii, 138 seq.
negotiates surrender of
Awaza with Bahram Chi-
bina, viil, 139 seq.
surrenders Awaza and sets
out for fran, viii, 143
insulted by Bahram Chu-
bina, viii, 144
Bahram Chubina tries to
placate, vill, 145
Pars (Persis, Farsistan), country
on the eastern shores of
the Persian Gulf, 142, 153,
160, i, 351, 353, S€q., 357,
360550 370 5) Ul, 237) 20; 70;
LOL, (226; 275, 266, 362;
410; iv, 146, 256, 269,
DIOS LO LOBE Vleck.
25, 32 note, 37, 45, 115,
119, 194 and passim ; vii,
86, 90, 95, 190, 194, 201,
206, 214, 224; viii, I09
nole, Ti2, 216, 241; 393;
395; ix, 68
corpse of Darius Codomanus
sent to, vi, 33
Ardshir Papakan flees to, vi,
220
marches from, against Ar-
dawan, vi, 227
returns to, vi, 22
franians, after the death of
Yazdagird son of Shapur,
meet to consult in, vi, 394
Parsis, ix, 64
Part Kings. See Tribal Kings.
Parthia, kingdom, v, Io
Hystaspes governor of, v,
Io
Parthian, Parthians, i 10, 60, 64 ;
vi, 203, 256, 322; vil, 156;
Vill, 73
conquest of fran by, i, 19
Zoroastrianism under, i, 63
340

Parthian, dynasty, ili, 9, II ; v,
281 ; vi, 194, 201
uses the title of King of
kings, vi, 197. ©
Great King, vi, 198
history, events of, repro-
duced in distorted form in
Shahnama, iii, II
kingdom, ii, 80
Parwiz, franian chief, vi, 394
Parwiz, meaning of, viii, 187.
See too Khusrau Parwiz.
Pashan (Ladan), battle of, iii, 15,

SOn CO evs a2 ames OA 2,
g0, 206; viii, 397 and
note

Pashang, father of Mintchihr, i,
Cfo e abi, AG) (GZ) “ahie, 185{op
marries daughter of [raj ;
i, 205

Pashang, ruler of Turan and
father of Afrasiyab, 142 ;
1/92) 380). 3870 leek eas:
EO. 20, 2 ZO7- AOin lil:
15 5) LV Oy LSO SL, Lad,
222 200250

consults his chiefs as to war
with fran, i, 342

bids Afrasiyab invade fran,
1, 343, 375

advised by Ighriras not to
make wai, 1, 344

overrules Ighriras, i, 344

Afrasiyab’s letter to, i, 346

wroth with Afrasiyab, i,
374 :

Pashang (Shida, g.v.), son
Afrasiyab, i, 92 ; ili, 15

Pashin, son of Kai Kubad. See
Kai Pashin.

Pashin, [ranian noble, vi, 408

Patashwargar, region, vi, 202 and

of

note
Pat-khusrau, brother of Gush-
tasp, v, 26

Patrician, iv, 348

Patrons of Firdausi, i, 29

Pauravas, Indian race and dyn-
asty, vi, 31

Paurtshasp. See Pourushaspa.

Perfumes, invention of, i, 133

GENERAL INDEX

| Periods, mythic and historic, of

Shahnama, i, 49, 53
Perozes (Piruiz), Sdsanian king,

vii, 159

Persepolis (Istakhr), city in
Pars, Vi, 31, 32 vole, 373;
ix, 65

buildings at, attiibuted to
Humai, v, 293

Zoroastrian scriptuies said
to have been burnt at, i,
63

Persia, 1) 308) ii; 917 1, LOO;

TZO) VP OL mG SOGRLOLEr
Vis OL 27 Sa vl lo. E263
280s Villy TG Sen Oo

Chess brought to, vi, 201;
vii, 280, 284 seq.

Fables of Bidpai brought to,
Vile eae aeescy>

| Persian, Petsians, i, 6, 8 seq., 73,

 

7A Wi, 190“ V; 74 5. Vi, 39
44, 45, 81, 143, 148, 157,
170, 201 and passim

bard, quoted, vii, 265

dispute with the Rumans
over Sikandar’s burial, vi,
184

empire, li, 9; vi, 197, ix, 65

war of, with Rum, viii, 41

history and legend in rela-
tion to Greek history and
legend, li, 9

language, vi, 147, 205; Vil,
T3A NAO) L439) 430)5 ixen bas
65

monks introduce the silk-
worm into Europe, vi, 204

mutilation of captives, vi,
323, 334, 348, 357, 404

sea or gulf, vi, 204, 205, ix,
66, 68

swords, vii, 135

wisdom-literature, vii, 278
seq., Vill, 3

verse, vii, 383
Fables of Bidpai trans-

lated into, vii, 383

conquest of Yaman, villi, 24
note

raid Sylia, vili, 41
 

GENERAL INDEX

Peisian, Persians, defeat by

Romans referred to, viii,

war with Turks, viii, 72

Book of Kings, viii, 73

Tabari. See Tabari.

= Bahram Chiubina, viii, 113

=Hurmuzd, vili, 116, 117

prince= Bahram Chubina,
viii, 319

ideas on marriage, ix, 7

=Ashtad and Kharrad, ix,
24

exonerate Shirin, ix, 38

win ‘The Battle of the
Bridge,’ ix, 67

fail in attack on Hira, ix, 67

defeat of, at Kadisiya, ix,

67, 84
Jalula, ix, 68
Nahavand, ix, 69
Shu’ba Mughira’s embassy
to, ix, 69
robes, ix, 94
transcribe Shahnama for

Firdausi, ix, 121

Persica, of Ktesias, v, 293

Persis (Pars, Farsistan), vi, 195

Peshé-tanu (Bishtitan g.v.), v,
12

Pestilence, in reign of Kubad, ix,
Sieh

Petroleum, in ancient cult and
modetn industry, i, 56 seq.

Pharasmanes, King of Kharazm,
Vib 072

Philip Il of Macedon, (Failakus,
B.C. 382-336), father of
Alexander the Great, i,
55 note, vi, 16, 29

Nectanebus and, story of,
vi, 18

names his son Alexander,
vi, 19

Philon, Macedonian noble, vi, 76

Philosophers, Greek, enter-
tained by Nushirwan, vii,
280

Phocas, Eastern Roman Em-
peror, viii, 187, 189, 193,
194

 

341

Phosphor, morning star, li, 123
Photius, quoted, viii, 191
Phraates II, Parthian’ king,
(B.C. 138-127), 11, 80, 81
Phraates=Tarhad, ili, 11
Phrygians, the, vi, 71
Pil, as rhyme-word, i, 75
Pillar, Bahram Gii’s, vii, 92, 160,
161, 164
Pilsam, Turadnian hero, 144, 146,
ii, 112 seq., 320, 323 note,
350 seg.; lil, 204
pleads for Siyawush, ii, 315
summons Piran to save Far-
angis, ii, 322
son of Wisa, Turanian
hero, cousin, commander-
in-chief, and counsellor of
Afrasiyab, 145, 146, 148-
P52 2 ils LZ. SO,
257 seéq., 264, 277, 291,
311, 315, 316, 335, 350,
379, 377, 379 Seq-, 397,
398.5, lil, 13, 20. 20le,, 30;
2, 58, 90, 91, 98 seq., 102,
TOSS) LZOn 225) 12325;
142, 149 seq., 158, 160,
161, 169, 181 seq., 192, 193,
199 seq., 216 seg:, 222,
22.7, M232 DIA eA Dee 52,
253, 259, 305 Seq-, 335 S€q.,
349, 359, 357; 1V, 7, 10
seg., 15 seq., 29 seq., 36,
38, 41, 47, 59 seq., 88 seq.,
93 SeJ., 103, 106 seq., 117,
118, 129, 134, 145, 159,
160, 162, 205, 206; viii,
414
character of, i, 55
identical with Harpagus in
legend, li, 191
advises Afrasiyab to receive
Siyawush, ii, 253 note and

Piran,

seq.

goes to welcome Siyawush,
li, 258 seq.

daughter of, 745. See Jarira.

arranges marriages for
Siyawush, I45, li, 268
seq.

entertains Siyawush, 1i, 278
342 GENERAL INDEX

Piran, offers to help Siyawush to | Piran, goes to Khutan, 1, 107

build. Gang-dizh, li, 278

prophecy of Siyawush to, ii,
282 seq.

goes to collect tiibute, ii, 285

visits Siyawush, li, 287
Afrasiyab, ii, 288

summoned to save Far-
angis, ii, 322 seq.

pleads for Farangis, ii, 324

takes charge of Farangis, i,
325

dreams of Siyawush, il, 325

protects the infant Kai
Khusrau, ii, 326 seq.

advises Afrasiyab respecting
Kai Khusrau, li, 356

sends Kulbad and Nastihan
to pursue Kai Khusrau,
Tie Se

overthrown with his host
by Giv, li, 385

appeals to Kai Khusrau, u,
386

released, ii, 387

desciibes Giv’s prowess to
Afrasiyab, ii, 389

disgraced, ii, 390

retires to Khutan, ii, 390

appointed to oppose the
franians, ii, 71, 79

marches on. Giravgard to
surprise the [ranians, iii.
80

captures the [ranians’ herds,
iii, 81

defeats the Iranians, iii, 82,

94

Ruhham’s embassy to, ii, 87

grants a month’s aimistice
to Fariburz, iii, 88

losses of, in battle, 11, 94

takes half of Kawa’s stand-
ard, ili, 94

sends Ruin to attack Bah-
ram, 111, 98

goes to see Bahram, ili, 99

hears of the [ranians’ 1e-
treat, ii, 105

informs Afrasiyab and re-
turns in triumph, ili, 106

goes to oppose Tus, ili, 117

informs Afrasiyab of the

franian invasion, iii, 118

reinforced, iii, 118

joins battle with Tus, iii, 118

sends a watlock to bring a
snowstorm on the fran-
jlans, ii, 128

defeats the franians, iii, 131

takes counsel with his chiefs,
Lip es

pursues the franians, iii, 134

sends Lahhak and Human

on in advance, iii, 135

teaches Mount Hamawan,
ii, 137 ‘

beleaguers the Iranians, iii,
138

attacked by Tus, iii, 139

hears of the approach of
reinfoicements, ili, 151

hairangues his host, iii, 151

goes to meet his allies, iii,
153

plan of campaign of, re-
jected, ili, 162

hears of the arrival of fran-
jan succouls, ili, 164 seq.

Rustam, iii, 174

takes counsel with Kamus
and the chiefs, 11, 175, 182

attacks the Iranians, iii, 176

describes Rustam to Kamus,
iii, 183

parleys with Rustam, iti, 202

reports to his kindred his
interview with Rustam,
lil, 206

declines Rustam’s terms, ili,
217

retieats, lil, 231

counsels Afrasiyab, iii, 253

urges Afiasiyab to with-
draw to Chin, ili, 265

city of, ili, 335

enteitains Rustam in dis-
guise, ili, 335

pursues Rustam, ili, 349

sent by Afrasiyab to invade
ran, iv, II
 

GENERAL INDEX 343

Piran, holds parley with Giv, iv,

20

informs Afrdsiyab, iv, 20

receives reinforcements, iv,
20

rejects Giv’s overtures, iv,
21

occupies Kanabad, iv, 22

arrays his host, iv, 25

gives the céntre to Human
lv, 25
left to Burjasp, iv, 26
right to lLahhak and

Farshidward, iv, 26

sets scouts on the mountain-
top, iv, 26

dissuades Hitman
fighting, iv, 30

hears of Human’s death, iv,
51

sends Nastihan to make a
night-attack, iv, 53

hears of Nastihan’s death,
iv, 55

attacks Gudarz, iv, 55

proposes terms to Gudarz,
iv, 63

sends Ruin with letter to
Gidarz, iv, 67

receives Gudarz’ reply, iv, 74

haiangues his troops and
prepares for battle, iv, 75

sends messenger to Afra-
siyab, iv, 75

receives Afrasiyab’s reply,
iv, 80

becomes despondent, iv, 81,

from

9

sends Lahhak and Far-
shidward to take the
franians in flank, iv, 82

fights with Giv, iv, 84

appeals to Lahhak and
Farshidward for help, iv,
85

announces the proposed
Battle of Eleven Rukhs,
iv, 94

gives the chief command to
Lahhak and Farshidward,

iv, 94

Piran, instructs them, iv, 95

holds a parley with Gudarz
and arranges with him
the Battle of the Eleven
Rukhs, iv, 95 seq.

steed of, slain by Gudarz,
iv, 107

falls under his steed and is
injured, iv, 107

flees from Gudarz, iv, 107

tefuses to surrender, iv,
108

wounds Gutdarz, iv, 108

slain by Gudarz, iv, 109

lamented for by Lahhak
and Farshidward, iv, 112

Kai Khusrau, iv, 127

buried with the Turdnian
champions by Kai Khus-
Tau, iV; 1238

death of, announced to
Afiasiyab, iv, 151

treasures of, taken pos-
session of by Afrasiydab, iv,
219

Piruiz (Perozes), Shah, 166, vi, 3 ;

vii, 4, 153, 178 seq., 335,
359; vill, 73, 75, 168,
242, 245, 267, 285

passed over in the succes-
sion by Yazdagird, vil,
155

helped by the Haitalians,
vii, 156, 157

defeats Hurmuz, vii, 157

Hurmuz pardoned by, vii,
156, 158

Reign of, 166, vii, 159 seq.
Note on, vii, 159 seg.
calamities of, vii, 159

title of, vil, 159

relic of, vii, 159

measures of, against drought
vii, 159, 162

cities of, vii, 159, 163

expedition of, against the
Haitalians, vii, 159, 164
seq.
tradition of, vii, 160

in mythical story, vii,
161
344 GENERAL INDEX

Piruz (Perozes), Bahram Gur’s
pillar said to have been
moved by, vii, 161

daughter of, taken prisoner,
Vill, 1601
child of, the wife of
Kubad, vii, 161, 184
accession of, vii, I61
advances against Khush-
nawaz, vil, 164

gives the van to Hurmuz,
vii, 164

gives the rear to Kubad,
vil, 164

gives the regency to Balash,
vil, 164

makes Stfarai {(Sarkhan)
minister to Balash, vii,
164 and note
teplies to the appeal of
Khushnawaz, vil, 165, 167
defeated by Khushnawaz,
vii, 168
death of, vii, 168
Tranian tradition of the
revenge for, vii, 170
Sufarai determines to
avenge, vil, 173
Piriz, franian chief, vii, 85
Pirtiz, franian general, vil, 187
Pirtiz, franian warrior, vii, 219,

273 seq.
exhorts Nushzad to yield,
vii, 273
Piriz, father of Ustad, viii,
296

Piriz, son of Khusrau, minister
of Ardshir son of Shirwi,
175
appointed general, ix, 44
letter of Gu1az to, ix, 46
takes counsel, ix, 46
writes to Guraz, ix, 47
Guraz marches against, ix,
48
appeals to Tukhar, ix, 48
feasts with Aridshir, ix, 48
informs Guraz of the death
of Ardshir, ix, 51
put to death, ix, 57
Pirtiz, franian prince, ix, 59

Piriz, son of Shapur, franian
noble, takes Rustam’s
letter to Sa’ad, ix, 80, 81

| Pirizan, Persian general, com-

 

mands Persian forces at
Nahavand, ix, 68
slain, 1x, 69
Piriz-Ram (Ram-Pirtiz), city
built by Pirtz, 166, vii,
159, 163
Piriz Shaptr (Ambar q.v.), vi,
S275 327
Pisces, constellation, 1, 310 and
note ; il, 407; iii, 26, 159,
SIS) IVS OAt Vie Obes
Vil, 2455 Vil, 5%, 3425
ipl
Pishdadian, Pishdadians, i, 116,
373 Chav, Oi. a7
Dynasty, 1, 49; 115 seéq.,
122) 5 AiO 3801 I Osis
vi, 194
Plague. See Pestilence.
Planets,the seven, vi,206 ; vii,408
created by Ahriman, i, 52
evil influence of, i, 52
symbolized in the game of
naid, vii, 382
Plato (Falatun), Greek philo-
sopher (B.C. 427-347), vii,
100 note
Planisphere, ii, 215, 216
Pleiads, Pleiades, i, 114, 205,
244, 245, 267, 332; HU,
14812826394, 40075. lvs
183, 52455 6520) 5" iV, ino,
Dt eave LOO;, AOL saawiis
365; vili, 53, 158
Plutarch, Greek wiiter (A.D. 46-
E20), Wiley O77,
Poll-tax, vii, 215, 225
Polo, game of, 145, ii, 263 seq.,
292; iV, 349, 350; Vi, 329,
379, 382 ; vii, 57, 118, 143,
2354 Vill, 246, 247,250;
3755 1x tO
episode in Karnamak and
Shahnama, vi, 196, 257,
263, 271
-stick, li, 292; iv, 350; Vi,
271, 272);) Vil, 1 DOp elle meas
 

GENERAL INDEX

Porus (Fur q.v.), Indian king,
vi, 17, 62 seq., 606, 70, 83
son of, vi, 18, 63
Darius’ lette1 to, vi, 31
origin of name of, vi, 31
kingdom of, vi, 31
Alexander and, historical
account of, vi, 63
in the Pseudo-Callisthe-
nes, vi, 64, 67
stature of, vi, 64
nephew of, vi, 80 ;
Pourushaspa, father of Zar-
duhsht (Zoroaster), ii, 9 ;
Wa LA Es ke
Prefatory Note, vii, v
Prelate, or bishop q.v., iv, 341,
348; vi, 184

as militarist, iv, 197; v,
306; vi, 124; viii, 47
and note

Prelude, to Shahnama, i, 99 seq.
Kai Kaus, ii, 2
Suhrab, ii, 119
Siyawush, il, 191
Kai Khusrau, ili, 15
Farud, iii, 37
Kamus, iii, 110
Akwan, ill, 272
Bizhan and Manizha, iii, 287
Battle of the Twelve Rukhs,
lv, 9
Rustam and Shaghad, v, 261
Nushirwan, vii, 220
Hurmuzd, viii, 77
Presbyter, iv, 348
Pritha, Indian princess, iv, 316
Procopius, Byzantine historian
(6th century A.D.), vii,187
Prometheus, i, 57
Pronunciation, Note on, preced-
ing text in each volume.
Property-tax, remission of, 165
Prophet, the, Praise of, 139
Proverb, i, 194, 195, 197; vii,

185; vili, 187
Pseudo - Callisthenes, Greek
Romance of Alexander

the Great, li, 9; vi,
30 seg., 62 Seéq., 71, 72,
74 Seq.

 

345

Pseudo-Calisthenes, account and

versions of, vi, 13
17
vogue of, vi, 17
treatise of Palladius inter-
polated in, vi, 61
Alexander and Porus in, vi,
64
historic elements in, vi, 83
Egyptian elements in, vi, 83
Persian elements in, vi, 83
Arabic elements in, vi, 83
diagram to illustrate, vi, 84

seq:,

Ptolemy, son of Lagus, one of

Alexander the Great’s
generals, king of Egypt
(B.C. 323-283), and his-
torian, vi, 12, 13, 66

| Pulad, a div, ii, 44, 54, 55, 64,

93; ili, 256; iv, 296 and
note; Vv, 204
Pulad, franian hero, ii, 22
Pulad, Turanian hero, ii, 264;
iii, 199, 234
Puladwand, Turdnian hero or

div, =240);) ii) 197, 0268;
270

summoned by Afrasiydab, iii,
254

goes to help Afrasiyab, iii,
255

takes counsel with Afra-

slyab, ill, 256

worsts Tus, iii, 257
Giv, Ruhham, and Biz-

han, iil, 258

cleaves in twain Kawa’s
standard, iii, 258

challenged by Rustam, iii,
259

overthrown by Rustam, iii,
264

withdraws with his army
from the field, ili, 265

| as (Berbera q.v.), ii, 79
|

urandukht, Shah, 175, v, 294;
Wie Sia ean 50
treproaches Kubad, ix, 17
makes Shahranguraz prime
minister, 1x, 56
True Cross and, ix, 56
346

Purmaya (Barmaitn), brother of
Faridun, i, 90, 91; v, 261
referred to, i, 147, 165
Kaianush and, summon the
smiths to Faridun, i, 158
go with Faridtin against
Zahhak, i, 159
attempt to kill Faridun,
i, 160
Pusfarrukh, ix, 50
Python, Apollo and the, vi, 203

Q

QUEEN OF CHiN (wife of the
Khan), viii, 190
daughter of, slain by lion-
ape, viii, 322
asks Bahram Chubina to
avenge her daughter, viii,
324
steward of, plots with Khar-
rad against Bahram Chubina
Vili, 335
daughter of, cured by Khar-
rad, vili, 336
grants boon to Khariad,
viii, 338
disgraced, vili, 344
Questions, Mountain of the Holy,
i762
hard, vii, 102 seq.
Quince, omen of the, ix, 13, 14
Quintus Curtius, Roman writer
(1st century A.D.), vi, 65
on the Amazons, vi, 72

R

Races, duplicate in West and
East, vi, 68
fair-haired, vi, 73
Rad, ruler of Zabulistan, vii, 86
Rada, Mount, ix, 91, 94
Radwi, archimage
pleads with Mahwi for Yaz-
dagird, ix, 102

*The village of Riwad to the south
was Once the western boundary of the

GENERAL INDEX

Rai, city and district near Tih-
ran, I74, 1, 363, 366 seq. ;
i 235 BOO il 242 rene
EAT; 255; 2505 Vi) 14,0 LOrs
Vl, 325 202) 210,220) vals

SA GOON aOAy anvil mz
155, 166, 171, 173, 174,
TOO} 214s e200; 24015) sexs
68, 69, 89, 95, 96
seat of the Magi, i, 60
Khar of. See Khar. i, 368,

374, 381

Ardawan’s capital, vi, 201

Shapur of, vii, 184, 185, 191,
192

seat of Arsacid power, viii,
72

Bahram Chubina goes to,
vill, 306

Khusrau Parwiz oppresses,
vill, 365

misery of, viii, 367

Gurdya delivers, vill, 368

Rai. See Raja.

Raibad, town, about twenty
miles west of Nishapur,
and district east of the
jJagatai range, in Khura-
SA Val 22) eo mA
55, 76, 88, 112, 134

occupied by Gudarz,
16

arrival of Kai Khusrau at,
IVa) Ts L260

Raja (Rai) of Hind, temp. Luh-

TASp;, 1vge S20 sel 7
temp. Nushirwan, 169, vii, 140

and note, 143, 424

proposes wager to Nushir-
Wall, Wil, 5, 395, 397

receives game of nard from
Nushirwan, vii, 5, 381,
389 seq.

fails to discover how to play
the game, vil, 392

pays forfeit to Nushirwan,
vii, 393

receives Nushirwan’s gifts
from Barzwi, vii, 425

iv,

 

of the range may perhaps indicate what
district.
 

GENERAL INDEX

Raja, assists Barzwi in his mis-

sion to Hind, vii, 428
letter of, ix, 17
put in charge of Shirin,
1x17

Rakhsh, Rustam’s steed, r42, i,
386:}) i. 13;.42'seq:, 675743
94, 97, 110, 116, 139, 143,

3I1L 354; ili, 146, 177,
186, 189, 194, 195, 223,
224, 226, 227, 229, 259,
2O4. 275; 276, 276, 270;
313, 324, 326, 335, 342,
344, 346 seq., 359, 352;

iv, 295; v, 117, 184, 192,
198, 207, 208, 214, 210,
228 seq., 234 Seq., 266, 275

caught by Rustam, i, 378
seq.

described, i, 379, 380

care taken of, 1, 380

slays a lion, li, 45

encounters a dragon, ii, 48

stolen by Turkmans, ii, 121
seq.

sire of Shurab’s charger, ii,
128

saddled by Giv, Ruhham,
and Tus for the fight with

Suhrab, ii, 160

referred to, iii, 184, 228,
2533), V9, sE99

wounded by Asfandiyar, v,
229

returns home without Rus-
tam, ¥v,(229
Rustam’s thought of aban-
doning, v, 235
healed by the Simurgh, v,
237
tries to save Rustam, v,
270
falls into the pit, v, 270
body of, taken from pit by
Faramaiz, v, 275
tomb of, v, 276
lord of=Rustam, v, 306
Rakhshasas, vi, 13
Rakka (Callinicus, Kaliniyus q.v.,
Nicephorium, Warigh),
city, vill, 188

347

personification of the
Divine Grace, 1, 374. See
mountain-sheep.
Rustam’s life saved by a, ii,
40
constellation, ii, 299; v, 129
Ram, Fire-temple, vi, 202, 226
Ram, franian warrior, viii, 291
Ram Ardshir, city, vi, 202, 290
and note
Ram Barzin, high priest and
general, 167, vii, 275
Kubad’s testament kept by,
vii, 210
Nushirwan’s instructions to,
concerning Nushzad, vii,
267 seq.
goes to fight with Nush-
zad, vii, 272
hears of Nushzad’s
' wishes, vii, 276
Ram Barzin, Persian official,
vili, 313
Rambihisht, wife of Sdsan, vi,
198 ;
Ram Hurmuz, city in Khuzistan,
east of Ahwaz, vi, 199
plain of, vi, 199

Ram,

last

Ramishn - i - Ardshir, district,

vi, 202

Ram Kubad (Aragan), city, vii,
188

Ram Pirtiz. See Pitz Ram.

Rangwi, [ranian warrior, viii,
296

Rasafa, vii, 188

_ Rashnawad, captain of the host

to Humai, 158
assembles troops, v, 301

Darab enlists under, v,
301

host of, reviewed by Humai,
v, 302

marches on Rum, v, 302

and the adventure of the
Tuined vault, v, 303

gives presents to Darab, v,

304
questions Darab, v, 304
sends for the launderer and
his wife, v, 304
348 GENERAL INDEX

Rashnawad, Darab and, defeat
the Rumans, v, 305, 306
praises Darab, v, 305, 306
offers Darab the spoil, v, 306
grants peace to Caesar, v,
307
returns to Iran, v, 307
hears from the launderer and
his wife about the case of
Darab, v, 308
writes to Humai about the
case of Darab, v, 308
appears with Darab before
Humai, v, 309 seq.
Ras-Shaptr (Gund-i-Shapur,
q.v.), city, vi, 255, 256
Ratl, weight, vi, 156 and note
Raven, Raven-head, ix, 91 and
note, 95 note, 96
Ravi (Hydraotes), river in the
Punjab, vi, 64
Rawalpindi, town and distiict in
the Punjab, vi, 62
Rawlinson, Sir Henry, his ac-
count of Gotarzes’ insc1ip-
tion at Bihistun, iii, 9
Rawlinson, Professor, vi, 253
Red Sea, ii, 364
Reeds (bamboos), vi, 71
gigantic, seen by Sikandar,
vi, 148
used in house-building, vi,
71, 148
Religion, War of the, v, 19, 26
two campaigns of, v, 29
Remus, See Romulus.
Reseph, viii, 188
Responses, of Nushirwan, viii, 14
seq., 28 seq.
Revellers, Rosary of, ix, 38, 40
Rhyme-words, i, 74; ii, 228
NOLES Ni 20M Vy S720
vii, 88 and note, 89 and
note, 174 and nole, 245 and
note, 2603 and note
Firdausi and, viii, 397 note
Ridge of Gushtasp, v, 29
Riv-Ardshir, city east of the
Jarahi river near the head
of the Persian Gulf, vi, 202
referred to, vi, 22

 

Rivniz, son-in-law of Tus, 147,
Ip LAs 25 ais SOO
prepaies to attack VFartd,
ili, 51
referred to, ili, 55
burial of, iii, 68
Rivniz, son of Kai Kats, ii, 3;
lit E4196, sal iAn232
slain, ili, 93
battle for crown of, iii, 94
Rivniz, son of Zarasp, iv, 360
Zarir and, go to Rim, iv, 360
hails Gushtasp as Shah, iv,
362

| Rizmihr (Zarmihr), son of Stifa-

Tai, 166, vii, 207 ; viii, 169
identical with Sufaiai, vii,
185
Kkubad and, go to the Hai-
talians, vii, 186
fate of, vii, 186
loyalty of, to Kubad, vii, 196
helps Kubad to escape from
prison, vii, 197
negotiates a marriage for
Kubad, sii, 197
made chief minister, vii, 200
Rizwan, angel, ii, 39 and note,
288
Roc, mythical bird, i, 51, 235
Roman, Romans, i, 10; iii, 286;
V1, 254, 318, 325, 32605 vu,
214; vill, 188, 189, -195;
ix, 50, 66
relations of, with the fran-
jans, i, 14
empire, Eastern, i, 373; Vi,
253
war of, with Persian, viii,
41, 193
Alexander’s legendary visit
to, Vi, 30
EMPCLODS) Vly Ss 2I see
neglect the defences of the
Caucasus, vil, 187
so-called tribute of, to
Persia, vu, 187
treatment of Munzir by, vii,
207,
leads to war with Niushir-
wan, vil, 217
 

GENERAL INDEX

Romans,defeat Bahram Chubina,
viii, 76
Romance of Alexander the Great
(Pseudo-Callisthenes,
qg.v.), Vi, 11 seq., 88
incorporation of, in Shah-
nama, vi, 16
vogue of, vi, 17
sources of marvels in, vi, 12,
69
diagiam to illustrate, vi, 84
Rome, vi, 194, 197, 203, 301,

22

Shaptr son of Ardshir’s wars
with, vi, 294, 297
Bahram Gur’s war with, vi,

7
Romulus and Remus, foundling
legend of, v, 293
Rook, piece in chess. See Rukh.
Rosary of Revellers, ix, 38, 40
Roxana (Rushanak, q.v.), vi, 33
Alexander and, vi, 30
account of, vi, 32
Rudaba, daughter of Mihrab
_king of Kabul, wife of Zal,
and mother of Rustam,
Lp L EST. Mek AB ee OO. i ii:
44, 180; v, 182, 184, 190
note
Story of Zal and, i, 256 seq.
referred to, ili, 285
Zal hears of, i, 257
description of, i, 257, 259,
20452065 272
hears of Zal, i, 260
falis in love with Zal, i, 260
handmaids of, go in quest of
Tally ty 263
interview Zal, i, 266
invite Zal to visit Rudaba,
i, 267
reproached by the porter,
i, 267
describe Zal, i, 268
prepares to receive Zal, i,
269
entertains, and plights her
troth to, Zal, i, 272
Zal consults the archimages
on the matter of, i, 273

 

|

|
|

| Rudyab,

349

Ridaba, go-between with

Zal, i, 280

Zal sends Sam’s letter to, i,
280

rewaids her go-between, i,
281

go between of, discovered by
Sindukht, i, 281

reproached by her parents, 1,
282, 287

congratulated by Sindukht,
cha

seen and admired by Sam, i,
318

married to Zal, i, 318

Zal and, go to Sistan, i, 319

gilevous travail of, i, 320

saved by the Simurgh, i, 321

Caesarean operation per-
formed ufon, i, 322

gives birth to Rustam, i,
322

fasts in sorrow for Rustam,
v, 278

frenzy of, v, 278

regains her wits, v, 279

referred to, v, 190, 289

lamentation of, v, 289

Riudagi, Persian poet, versifies

the Fables of Bidpai, vii,
383, 431

of,

| Rudbar, district, v, 30

father of Papak (in
Shahnama), vi, 200, 212
Rue, wild, as a prophylactic, i,
380
Ruhham, son of Giidarz, franian
he10, li, 4, 62, 73, 144, 158, -
340; iil, 19, 33, 48, 67,
115, 126 seqg., 139 seq., 154,
157; sLo2, DOP 2k lsn 2aGy
259, 264, 268, 273, 322,
350; 3525 iV, 13) 15, 21,
31, 37, 147; vil 156
helps to saddle Rakhsh for
the fight with Suhrab, ii,
160
mortally wounds Farud, iii,
64
embassy of, to Pfran, iii, 87
attacks Bazur, ii, 128
GENERAL INDEX

Ruhham, worsted by Ashkabus,

ili, 179

goes to the help of Rustam,
11 227

worsted by Putladwand, iii,
258

goes with Rustam to rescue
Bizhan, ili, 334

commands the left wing, iv,
24

superseded pro tem, by
Farhad, iv, 92

chosen to fight with Barman
iv, 97

slays Barman, iv, 102

sent by Gutdarz to fetch
Piran’s corpse, iv, 110

acts as Kai Khusrau’s stan-
dard-bearer in his combat
with Shida, iv, 171

protests against Kai Khus-
rau’s fighting on foot with
Shida, iv, 174

holds Kai Khusrau’s steed,
iv, 175

instiucted by Kai Khusrau
to bury Shida, iv, 176

Kai Khusrau remonstrated
with by, and other nobles
for refusing audience, iv,

275
Ruhham, king of Rai, temp.

Bahram Gur, vii, 85

Ruhham, franian warrior, vii,

156
helps Piriz to gain the
throne, vii, 156, 186;
Vill, 73

Ruin, son of Piran, 151, i, 92;

fil 2O7, 234 lve LO in,
go, 102, 152, 153, 162

summons Piran to _ save
Farangis, ii, 323 and note

sent by Piran to attack
Bahram, ii, 98

wounded by Bahram, iii,
99

put in command of ambush,
iv, 26

bears letter from Piran to
Gudarz, iv, 67

_ Ruin, entertained by Gidarz, iv,

68

returns to Piran with Gu-
darz’ reply, iv, 74

goes to help Piran against
Giv and is defeated, iv, 84

chosen to fight with Bizhan,
iv, 97

slain by Bizhan, iv, 103

| Ruina, place, ix, 91
| Rukh, piece in chess (castle), vii,

385, 423 _

position of, iv, 8,; vii, 388,
422

move of, iv, 8; vii, 422

Rukhs, Battle of the Twelve, 151;

iv, 7 Seq:
meaning of, iv, 7
Battle of the Eleven, 7571,
iv, 88
arranged by Gudarz and
Piran, iv, 95 seq.
Firdausi’s reflections on,
iv, 7, 98, 106
referred to, v, 29; vii, 156

Rum, the Eastern Roman Em-

pire, 154, 158, 162, 167,
72) 7 Zs lke 5 220 eee
TAS, © 20/7,.11307,) SOO; mle
106, 151, 164, 296; iv, 14,
133) 145; 91960) LO7, e200"
272, 312, 314, 316, 317,
323 Sé€q., 339, 331, 333 Seq.,
339, 341 Seq., 345, 348, 349
3523" 353s 355, 359, 9359;
361, 364,; Vv, 75, 76, 102,
180, 188, 262, 301, 305;
Vi, 40, 41, 45, 51, 53, 81;
Q4, -104; 113) seg., “and
passim

king of=Mahmiud, i, 113
=Sikandar, vi, 172

West and, Salm’s portion, 1,
189

brocade of, i, 157, 183, 210,
252, 263, 316 and passim ;
iii, 26, 235, 291, 297, 355;
iV, 128, 271, 3045 6V5. 295)
vi, 56, 89; vu, 64, 67, 276,
384; vill, 157, 173, 278,
337, 367, 374; 1X, 99, IOI
GENERAL INDEX 351

Rum, helm of, iii, 114 Ruiman, Rimans, king of = Philip

 

sea of, iii, 177

city in, founded by Salm, iv,
325

ravaged by Rashnawad and
Darab, v, 307

ambassadors from, come to
Darab, vi, 21

Darab wars with, vi, 22

prince of, vi, 22

chiefs of, vi, 23, 153
withdraw on Dardab’s ap-

proach, vi, 23

tribute of, to fran, vi, 24
explained, vii, 187

ambassadors from, come to
Dara, vi, 35

teed (pen) of, vi, 85

stuffs of, vi, 143

philosophers of, vi, 115,
T5450, Vill. 270), 392

cavaliers of, vi, 167

Shah of=Sikandar, vi, 170

Sikandar’s policy to safe-
guard, vi, 178

Arastalis’ advice to Sikan-
dar concerning, vi, 179

invaded by Shapur, vi, 350

slave-girls of, chosen by
Bahram Gui, vi, 382

Bahram Gur’s war with, vii,
4, 5, 84

Niushirwan’s wars with, vii,
213

robes of, viii, 308

captured cities of, restored
to, viii, 312

monks of, slain by Mahwi,
1x, I13

Ruman, Ruimans, 154, 158, 162,

167, 172, 173, iii, 309 ; iv,
357, 360, 363 ; V, 173, 205
292; Vi, 44, 45, IOI seq.,
ELS Lk4s 27 Os, ao,

168, 170, 179 seqg., and
passim

slaves, i, 252; vi, 382; vii,
54, 259

invade Tran, Vv, 301
defeated by Rashnawad and
Da1ab, v, 305 seq.

of Macedon, vi, 19

carry out works in fran, vi,
21

=Sikandar, vi, 50, 52,
154

franians ask quarter of, vi,
51

tongue, vi, 160;
261

dispute with the Persians as
to Sikandar’s burial, vi,
184

sages, vi, 185
their sentences over the

coffin of Sikandar, vi,
I, 85, seq.

silk, vi, 280, ; vli, 424

defeated by Shapur, son of
Ardshir, vi, 297

engineers build bridge at
Shushtar, vi, 299

astrologic tablets, vi, 376

eunuchs, vii, 67, ; viii,
2/96

pen, vii, 73

helmet, vii, 89, 272, 274

bishop, vii, 275, 276

envoy, vill, 8 seq.

surrender to Nushirwan, viii,

vii, 256,

47

entrench themselves, viii,
47

sue for peace and pay tribute
Vili, 51 seq.

architect, vill, 193, 401

marches, vili, 252

robes, viii, 253

helms, viii, 105, 276, 417

worsted by Bahram Chu-
bina, vili, 292

artificers imprisoned by
Khusrau Parwiz, vili, 402
released by Khusrau Par-

wiz, viii, 403

Rimiya (New Antioch, Sursan

q.v.),a suburb of Ctesiphon
(Taisafin)on the east bank
of the Tigris, vii, 218

Rus (Russia), vi, 19 ; viii, 406

king of, vi, 22
352 GENERAL INDEX

Rushanak (Roxana, q.v.), daugh-
ter of Dara (in Shahnama)
and wife of Sikandar, 758,
I59, li, 3; vi, 86 seq., 188

account of, vi, 32

derivation of, vi, 33

bestowed by Da1a on Sikan-
dar, vi, 55

son of, vi, 81, 181

visited by Nahid, vi, 89

married to Sikandar, vi, 90

reference in Sikandar’s Will,
to, vi, 181

Rushan Piruz, city, vii, 160

Russia, vi, 19

Russian, Russians, vi, 19

empire, vi, 19
foundation of, vi, 19
clothe 1x e110

Rustam, son of Zal, franian
national hero, JI41I-150,
153, 154, 150, 157,13, 42,
68, 90, 174, 235 seqg., 376
seq.; li, 4, 18, 25, 34, 35,
42 Seq., 79, 92 Seq., 188,
230) 223727 ZO Onn 200)
311, 316, 318, 319, 335,
344 S€q-, 349 Seq., 371, 372,
380, 394, 400; ill, 24, 35,
36, 40, Lo7 seg:, 121, 134,
138, 141 seq., 155, 164 seq.,
182 seq., 294, 307, 308 ; iv
Il, 13, 27, 39, 65, 157;
NOW L725 LOO 220, 62275
257 2ObE 20, 8202). SLO:
3245 V, 9, 22, 390, 59, 73;
86, 165, 254 seq., 278, 279,
Pini, Oth Pe} 3 Val, 2 5\\
395; Vil, 151; viii, 106,
L772 O22 2 ODEN 2 5

Caesarean Dicche Ole al
236, 321 seg.
account of, in Moses of
Chorene, i, 236
presage of, by the astrolo-
gers, i, 278, 307
Simurgb, i, 321
oligin of name, i, 322 and
note
effigy of, sent to Salm, i, 322
nurturing of, i, 324

 

Rustam, goes with Zal and

Mihrak to meet Sam, i, 325

slays the white elephant, i,
327, 377

bidden by Zal to take Mount
Sipand, 1, 329

takes Mount Sipand, i, 331,

Sih }
sends the Spoil to Zal, i, 333
sets fire to Mount Sipand, i,

333

bidden by Zal to prepare for
Was, ie 370

reply of, 1, 376

Zal gives Sam’s mace to, i,
378

obtains Rakhsh, i, 378

goes in quest of Kai Kubad,
i, 382 seq.

slays Kulun, i, 386

first campaign of, ii, 11 seq.

nearly takes Afrasiyab
prisoner, li, 14, 116, 354

rewarded by Kai Kubad, ii,
21

Seven Courses of (Haft
Khwan) 243, ii, 44 seq.

life of, saved by aram, ii, 46

song of, ii, 51

rescues Kai Kaus in Mazan-
daran, ii, 58

handgrip of, ii, 66, 67

encounter of, with Kalahur,
thks “(8 ¥7/
Juya, ii, 71

audience of, with the king of
Mazandaran, ii, 67 seq.

encounter of, with the king
of Mazandaran, ii, 73

rewaided by Kai Kaus, ii, 77

entertains Kai Kaus, ii, 83

takes the king of Sham
prisoner, li, 97

defeats Afrasiyab, li, 100

made paladin of paladins by
Kai Kats, ii, ror

goes in search of Kai Kats,
ii, 104

takes part in the Fight of the
Seven Warriors, li, 107 seq.

slays Alkus, i, 115
 

GENERAL INDEX 353

Rustam, and Suhrab, Story of,

li, 118 seq.
loses Rakhsh, ii, 121
Afrasiyab’s plot against, ii,
129
holds a drinking-bout, ii, 141
quarrels with Kai Kaus, ii,
142
reconciled by Guidarz, li, 144

Seq.
goes in disguise to see Suh-
rab, ii, 149

adventure of, with Zhanda
Razm, ii, 149 seq.

Suhrab described by, ii, 151,
166

encampment of, described,
li, 154

armed by Tus, Giv, and
Ruhham for his fight with
Suhrab, ii, 160

challenges Suhrab, ii, 161

charge of, to Zawara, li, 167

declines Suhrab’s advances,
li, 169

saves his life by a ruse, ii,
170

prays that his strength may
be restored, ii, 171

learns too late that Suhrab
is his son, ii, 173

grief of, ii, 173 seq.

makes a truce with Human,
i, 176

tries to slay Hajir, i, 176
himself, ii, 177

brings up Siyawush, li, 196

maiches with him against
Afrasiyab, il, 225, seq.

returns and quarrels with
Kai Kats, ii, 242 seq.

grief and wrath of, at the
death of Siyawush, ii, 338
seq.

puts Surkha to death, ii, 346

fights with the Turanians, ii,
349 seq.

appoints Tus ruler of Chach,
ii, 358

Giidarz ruler of Sughd and
Sipanjab, ii, 358

VOL, IX.

 

Rustam, daughte: of,

li, 383,
384, iii, 323

_ wife of, ii, 384, lil, 323

hears of Kai Khusrau’s
arrival in fran, ii, 395

Turkman occupation of Za-
bulistan, account of by, iii,
14

goes to do homage to Kai
Khusrau, iii, 17

witnesses Kai Khusrau’s
oath to avenge Siyawush,
iil, 22

proposes to Kai Khusrau to
expel Turkmans from Za-
bulistan, ili, 30

asks Kai Khusrau to pardon
Tus and the franians in
the matter of Farid, iii,
113

summoned by Kai Khusrau,
iii, 143

advocates the mariage of
Fariburz and Farangis,
iii, 146

marches to succour Tus, iii,
148

meets Gtidarz, iii, 171

takes counsel with Tus and
the chiefs, ii, 172

arrays the host, iil, 177

fight of, with Ashkabus,
legend about, iii, 109
referred to, vill, 75

parleys with Ashkabus, iii,
180

slays Ashkabus, iii, 181

described by Piran, iii, 183

harangues the troops, iii,
186, 219, 223, 232, 235

challenged by Kamis, ii,
187

spear-bearer of,
Kamus, iii, 188

parleys with Kamius, iii, 188

takes Kamus prisoner, ili,
189

and the Khan of Chin, Story
of, 149, ili, 191 seq.

refe_red to, ili, 193

slays Chingish, ili, 195

Zz

slain by
394: GENERAL INDEX
Rustam, parleys with Hitman, , Rustam, Story of fight of, with

ill, 196

conditions of peace offered
by, ili, 197, 205

parleys with Piran, iii, 202

proposes peace on terms to
the franians, iii, 211

watned by Gudarz not to
trust Piran, iii, 212

wrath of, with Piran, iii, 218

unhotses Shangul, ili, 221

prowess of, in battle, ili, 222
Seq.

overthrows Kundur, ili, 224

slays Sawa, iii, 224
Gahar, lll, 225

attacks the Khan of Chin,
ili, 225, seq.

victorious, lil, 231, seq.

wroth with Tus and the
franians, iii, 234

sends Fariburz to Kai Khus-
rau with tidings of victory,
li, 236, seq.

leads on the host, ili, 238

reaches Sughd, iii, 244

sends troops to attack
Bidad, iii, 244

slays Kaft1, iii, 245

besieges and stoims Bidad,
ili, 246 :

sends Giv to raid Khutan,
L247,

praised by Gudarz, ili, 248

described py Afrasiyab, iii,
251

attacks the Turanians, iil,
257

challenges Puladwand, iii,
259

overthrows Puladwand, iii,
204

defeats the Turanians, iil,
266

divides the spoil, iii, 266

ravages Turan, ili, 266

returns in triumph, ili, 267

asks Kai Khusrau’s leave to
teturn to Zal, iii, 269

rewarded by Kai Khusrau,
ili, 269

 

the div Akwan, 149, iii,
271 seq.
summoned to court by Kai
Khusrau, tii, 274
pursues the div Akwan, iii,

275

foiled by Akwan, ui, 276

taken at a disadvantage by
Akwan, ili, 276

offered a choice of deaths by
Akwan, ili, 277

outwits Akwan, iii, 277

finds Rakhsh among Afra-
siyab’s herds, iii, 278

encounters Afrasiyab’s
herdsmen, iii, 279

defeats Afrasiyab, iii, 280

slays Akwan, 11, 281

carries off the spoil, iii,
281

welcomed by Kai Khusrau,
lii, 282

tells his adventure with
Akwan, ili, 282

rewarded by Kai Khusrau,
ili, 283

returns home, iii, 283

summoned to court in the
matter of Bizhan, iii, 319
seq.

visited by Giv, ili, 322

promises to help Giv, iii,
324

goes with Giv to court, iu,
326

address of, to Kai Khusrau,
Ane 7

undertakes the rescue of
Bizhan, ili, 330

plan of, iii, 333

chooses his comrades, iii,
334

goes disguised to Turan, iii,
559

gives presents to Piran, iii,
336

welcomed by Piran, ili, 336

opens a market, ill, 337

interviews of, with Manizha,

iii, 337, 342
 

GENERAL INDEX 355

Rustam, sends food and his ring

to Bizhan, ili, 340

removes boulder of Akwan
from pit’s mouth, ii, 345

makes conditions for release
with Bizhan, ili, 345

releases Bizhan, ili, 346

airays his troops against
Afrasiyab, lii, 350

mocks Afrasiyab, iti, 351

defeats Afrasiyab, lili, 352

triumphant return of, iii,
303

presents Bizhan to Kai
Khusiau, lili, 354

rewarded by Kai Khusrau,
lii, 356

goes to Sistan, ili, 356

sent to Hindustan by Kai
Khusrau, iv, 14

successes of, iv, 60, 71

troops of, recalled, iv, 145

commands the right wing,
iv, 147

attacks with Kai Khusrau
from the centre, iv, 180

goes with Zawara to the
right wing, iv, 180

sent to the desert to attack
Tawurg, iv, 188

reports his defeat of Tawurg,
lv, 193

advances, iv, 194

failure of Afrasiyab’s at-
tempt to surprise, iv, 195

takes part in the siege of
Gang-bihisht, iv, 199, 208
seq.

Kai Khusrau’s converse
with, iv, 198, 199

captures Jahn and Garsiwaz,
iv, 210

advises Kai Khusrau_ to
reject Afrasiydb’s over-
tures, iv, 222

ordered to prepare for a
night-attack from Afra-
siyab, iv, 224

supports Kai Khusrau’s pro-
posal to pursue Afrasiyab
to Gang-dizh, iv, 231

| Rustam, left by Kai Khusrau in

Chin, iv, 241 -

welcomes Kai Khusrau on
his return from Gang-
dizh, iv, 251

accompanies Kai Khusrau
to Siyawushgird, iv, 252

summoned by the franians
to remonstrate with Kai
Khusrau, iv, 278

with Zal and the sages, sets
forth for fran, iv, 279

met on arrival by Gudarz
and other chiefs, iv, 282

holds converse with the
franians, iv, 282

audience of, with Kai Khus-
Tau, iv, 283 seq.

holds, with other chiefs, at
the bidding of Kai Khus-
rau an assembly on the
plain, iv, 291 seq.

Kai Khusrau’s gift to, iv,
295

confirmed by Kai Khus-
rau in possession of Nim-
TMZ, 1s 207)

sets out with Kai Khusrau
on his pilgrimage, iv,
306

turns back at the bidding of
Kai Khusrau, iv, 307

laments the loss of the pala-
dins and returns to fran,
iv, 310

Zal and, welcome Gushtasp
to Sistan, v, 85

rivalry in legend between
Asfandiyar and, v, 116

Haft Khwan of, compared
with that of Asfandiyar,
v, 117

Asfandiyar’s fight with,
Story of, 156, v, 166 seq

recited by Nadr, son of
Harith, at Mecca, v, 166

referred to, v, 169, 170, 306

Gushtasp bids Asfandiyar
go against, v, 173

Asfandiyar’s message to, v,
179
356 GENERAL INDEX

Rustam, life of, attempted by , Rustam, bids Zawara bring him

Bahman, v, 184

interview of, with Bahman
v, 185

entertains Bahman, v, 186

great appetite of, v, 186, 210

jests with Bahman on his
small appetite, v, 186

sends Zawara and Faramarz
to bid Zal and Rudaba
prepare to receive Asfan-
diyar, v, 190

goes to the Hirmund, v,
IQI

parleys with Asfandiyar, v,
192, seq.

invites Asfandiyar to visit
him, v, 193

accepts Asfandiyar’s invita-
tion to a feast, v, 195

tells Zal, of his interview
with Asfandiyar, v, 196

indignation of, at not being
summoned to the feast,
v, 197

sets forth to reproach Asfan-
diyar, v, 198

wrangle of, with Asfandiyar,
v, 198 seq.

demands his proper seat at
the feast, v, 200

Zal and, vilified by Asfan-
diyar, v, 201

details his ancestry, v, 202

recounts Sam’s exploits, v,
202
his own exploits, v, 203,
207

patents of, from Kai Kaus
and Kai Khusrau, v, 203

aged six hundred years, v,
204

tries a handgrip with Asfan-
diyar, v, 209

accepts Asfandiyar’s
lenge, v, 209

asks for neat wine, v, 211

makes fresh overtures to
Asfandiyar, v, 211 seq.

addresses the royal tent-
enclosure, v, 215

chal-

|

 

his arms, v, 218

rejects Zal’s counsels, v, 220

arms for battle, v, 222

gives Zawara charge of the
troops, v, 222

goes with Zawara to the
Hirmund, v, 222

instructs Zawara, v, 222

crosses the Hirmund and
summons Asfandiyar to
the combat, v, 223

suggests a general engage-
ment, v, 224

distress of, at the death of
Nush Azar and Mihr-i-
Nush, v, 228

offers to surrender Zawara
and Faramaiz to Asfan-
diyar, v, 228

wounded by Asfandiyar, v,
229

flees from Asfandiyar, v,
229

sends Zawara with a message
to Zal, v, 230

parleys with Asfandiyar, v,

231

recrosses the Hirmund, v,
231

kin of, grieve over his

wounds, v, 234
bids the leeches to attend to
Rakhsh first, v, 234
despair of, v, 235
advised by Zal, v, 235
Zal summons the Simurgh
to the aid of, v, 235
healed by the Simurgh, v,

237

instructed by the Simurgh
how to overcome Asfan-
diyar, v, 237, seq.

cuts the fatal branch of
tamarisk, v, 239

prepares the arrow, v, 240

summons Asfandiyar to re-
new the fight, v, 240

makes a final effort for peace
with Asfandiyar, v, 241
Seq.
 

GENERAL INDEX

Rustam, bewails Asfandiyar to
Bishutan, v, 246
Asfandiyar confides Bahman
to, v, 248
foretells an evil future for,

v, 248

laments Asfandiyar, v, 250

warned by Zawara against
Bahman, v, 250

sends Asfandiyar’s corpse to
Gushtasp, v, 251

Bahman remains with, v,
252, 256

instructs Bahman, v, 256

writes to Gushtasp to excuse
himself in the matter of
Asfandiyar, v, 256

overtures of, to Gushtasp
supported by Bishutan,
Vv, 257

Gushtasp accepts the ex-
cuses of, and writes to, v,
257

requested by Gushtasp to
send back Bahman, v, 258

equips Bahman for his jour-
ney, v, 258

Story of, a Shaghad, 757,
v, 260 seq.
provenance of, v, 260 seq.

death of, v, 261, 273, 289
versions of, v, 261

Kabul’s tribute to, question
of, v, 265

Shaghad and the king of
Kabul plot against, v, 265

takes up Shaghad’s cause, v,
267

prepares to occupy Kabul
with a host, v, 268

persuaded by Shaghad to go
with Zawara and a small
escort, v, 268

pardons king of Kabul, v,

269

entertained by king of |
Kabul, v, 269

goes hunting with Zawara,
v, 270

falls a victim to treachery,
v, 270

 

357
Rustam, Shaghad, glories over,

v, 271

slays Shaghad, v, 272

last words of, v, 272

corpse of, taken from the
pit by Faramarz, v, 274

obsequies of, v, 274 seq.

Artabanus and, v, 282

burial place of, v, 287
scene of the battle be-
tween Bahman and Fara-
marz, v, 287

personification of the Sacae,
15655 Vi, LOY:

conduct of, in Hamavaran,
viii, 104, 168

banner of, bestowed on
Bahram Chubina, vii,
TOS 2L7

| Rustam, Persian commander in

chief under Yazdagird III,
£76 31x, 66; 67, 69; 73; 81
séq., 90, 95
brother of Farrukhzad, viii,
413 and note
revolt of, vili, 413
overthrows Azarmdukht, ix,

59
advances to Kadisiya, ix, 67,

13
end of, ix, 69
finds evil aspects in the stars
ix, 73
wiites to his brother, ix, 73
hears of Shu’ba Mughira’s
arrival, ix, 82
Rizbih, Bahram Gur’s high
priest; 164, vii, 26 seq., 54,
67
bewails Bahram Gur’s
course of life, vii, 56
reproached by Bahram Gur
for his parsimony, vii, 83
Ruzbih, scribe, viii, 252

S
Sa’ap, son of Wakkas, Arab
general, 176, ix, 67, 68,
82 seqg., 90
358

Sa’ad, succeeds Abu ’Ubaida, ix,
67
at Kadistya, ix, 67, 69
founds Kufa, ix, 67
takes Ctesiphon, ix, 67
recalled, ix, 68
sent by ’Umar to invade
fran, ix, 72
letter of Rustam to, ix, 78
taken by Piruz, ix, 80, 81
Sabbakh, king of Yaman, iv, 146
Sabz dar sabz, melody, viii, 399
and note
Sacae (Scythians), i, 17, 19
Rustam a personification of,
1 OSE VIELOA:
Sacaestan. See Sistan.
Sacrifice, human, and serpent-
worship, i, 143
feastLot, B40, soa) eave
3173 V, 309; Vi, 33, 55,
230 and note, 245, 273,

Sada,

3895 Vil, 11; s04,- 200;
Vill OS, IBS) ee lOmEan si:
ix, 40 92

institution of i, 124
Sada, Iranian noble, vii, 312
Safid Rud, river flowing through
Gilan into the Caspian,
Ve Ly LO
Sagastan (Sistan q.v.), v, 13
Sage, sages, I59, vi, IOI, 103
Indian, vi, 62 :
naked (Brahmans q.v.)
of Kaid. See Kaid.
saying of, vili, 155
Sagittarius, constellation, i, 188 ;
iv, 355
Sagsar, Sagsars, district and
tribe, i, 279 and noie, 290,
323, 339; 1,143, Ml, 152,

207
Sahadeva, one of the five Pan-
davas, iv, 138

referred to, iv, 139
Sahi, wife of fraj, i, 188
referred to, i, 182 seq.
Sahl, son of Mahan, franian
noble, v, 260, 261, 263
Saifu’d-Daula, title of Sultan
Mahmud, i, 21

GENERAL INDEX

Sakil, son of Cesar,
Luhrasp, iv, 355
commands the left wing,
iv, 355
| Sakila, mountain, 169, iv, 342;
vill, 41
dragon of, 154, iv, 342 seq.
referred to, iv, 343, 351,
358
stronghold of, taken by
Rumans, vill, 47
| Saklab (Slavonia), li, 360; iii,
Ti 2eehOA ne 7m ol aee2OAe
DLS we 22 SCq.,9 28522505
2QAS 2 hire Vly a 7. Osc 6 nvalls
LULZ, U5, S04) vill 370
Salm, eldest son of Faridtn, 140,
I4T, 1, 42, 90, 91, 183 seq.,
335, 342, 344, 362; i,
19; 237, 318; il, 37, 115,
1V, 663960;1200,. 272 5. Vv,
205 ZOL MZO4e eve 5 Ou:
Vise LOL vill, 266502705
300, 376 note, 378, 381
racial significance of, 1, 54
etymology of, Firdaust’s, i,
174
naming of, 1, 187
horoscope of, i, 188
receives Rum and the West,
1, 189
envies [raj, i, 190
plots with Tur, i, 190
Tur and, demand the abdi-
cation of fraj, i, 191
{raj visits, i, 198
fraj not welcomed by,
i, 198 seq,
slay [raj, i, 201
send fraj’s head to Fari-
dun, i, 202
hear of Minuchihr, i, 208
send an embassy to Fari-
dun, i, 208
receive Faridun’s reply, i,
213 Seq.
prepare for war, i, 215
worsted by Minuchihr, i,
220
plan night-surprise, i, 220

temp.

 

worsted, i, 221
GENERAL INDEX 359

Salm, hears of Tur’s defeat and

death, i, 22

retreats on the castle of the
Alans, i, 22

prevented by Miniuchihr, i,
223

flees from Miniuchihr, i, 227

slain by Mintchihr, i, 228

troops of, ask quarter of
Minitchihr, i, 228

head of, sent to Faridun, i

229
Scimitar of, iv, 335 seq.

Salt, Rustam’s caravan of, i,

330 seq.
desert, 1, 3
fish, legend of the, vi, 76 seq.

Sam, son of Nariman, franian

hero, father of Zal and
grandfather of Rustam,
LAT Shae i. AZ. 207; 202.
231, 235, 238 seq., 337,
344, 375; U, 4, 16, 17, 33,
34, 49, 125, 126, 137, 140,
073), hO2, Lota soy Len,
202, 215, 260, 279, 283;
1Vi. 222.6 255.200) 301,
319; V, 14, 15, 58, 62, 63,
196, 198 seq., 242, 262
seq., 266, 267, 274, 285,
286, 289, 290; vii, 74;
vill, 223

pronunciation of, i, 95 note

etymology of, i, 171 seq.

Minuchihr confided to, by
Faridun, i, 231

mace of, i, 235, 290, 297, 328
given by Zal to Rustam,
i, 378

speech of, to Minuchihr, i,
238

casts away his son Zal at
birth, i, 241

hears rumours of Zal, i, 243

dreams of, concerning Zal,
i, 243, 244

consults the archmages and
bidden to seek his son,
i, 243

finds his son on Mount
Alburz, i, 244 seq.

 

Sam, son of, restored to him by

the Simurgh, i, 247
returns home with Zal, i, 248
congratulated by Minu-

chihr, i, 248
goes with Zal to court, i, 249
tells of his quest to Mini-

chihr, i, 250
Mintchihr’s gifts to, i, 251
public rejoicings at his

home-coming, i, 252
goes to the wars and leaves

Zal to rule in Zabulistan,

i, 253
Mihrab tributary to, i, 256
Zal writes to, about Rudaba,

i, 275
receives Zal’s letter, i, 277
consults the astrologers, i,

278
Rustam’s birth foretold to,

i, 278
replies to Zal’s letter, i, 279
returns from the war, i, 280
summoned to court, i, 289
welcomed by Mintchihr, 1,

289
tells of his campaign, i, 290
slays Karkwi, i, 291
bidden to destroy Mihrab

and all his belongings, i,

292
welcomes and promises to

help Zal, i, 293
writes to Minuchihr and

pleads past services, 1, 295
tells of the slaying of the

dragon of the Kashaf, i,

296
“One blow,” i, 297, 299
receives Sindukht in aud-

ience i, 302
invited by Sindukht to

visit Kabul, i, 305
dismisses Sindukht with

gifts, 1, 305
hears of Zal’s success with

Mintichihr and informs

Mihrab, i, 314
goes with Zal to Kabul, i,

317
360

Sam, sees Rudaba and felicitates

Zales

returns to Sistan, i, 319

entertains Mihrab and Sin-
dukht, i, 319

leaves Zal the regent of Sis-
tan and goes on a cam-
paign, i, 319

hears of the birth of Rustam,
1323

writes to congratulate Zal,
e323

comes to see Rustam, i, 324

bids Zal and Rustam fare-
well, 1, 327

hears of Rustam’s success
at Mount Sipand and
writes to Zal, i, 334

Naudar’s appeal to, i, 339

goes to court, i, 340

met and offered the crown
by the franian chiefs, i,
349

tefuses the crown, i, 340

reconciles the chiefs and
Naudar, i, 341

counsels Naudar, i, 341

rewarded by Naudar, i, 341

departs, i, 341

death of, referred to, i, 345,
346, 349

obsequies of, 358

mace of, given by Zal to
Rustam, i, 378

exploits of, recounted by
Rustam, v, 202

Sam, franian warrior, temp.
Yazdagird son of Shapur,
vi, 395

Sama Keresaspa Narimanau,
Iranian hero, i, I7I seq.

Samangan, city south-east of

Balkh (?), 744 ii, 121 seq.,
130
king of, 144, ii, 118, 140, 184
entertains Rustam, ii, 122
father of Zhanda Razm,
li, 150
Samanid, Samanids, i, 14,
21 O77) VL ees OS
end of dynasty of, i, 21

20,

 

GENERAL INDEX

Samarkand (Sogdiana, Sughd),
city and district in Turk-

ISCAM, 1,24 Vile Or
358, 350 5 will, 3775 1,
96, 115

early seat of Aryan civili-
Zaitl One) tse)
settlement of the Huns at,
i, 19
Sambaz, franian chief, speech of,
Vili, 242
Samiran, king, vi, 405 and note
Samkuran, Iranian hero, iv, 149
Sandar, Sandarus, the Arar tree,
Va, LO
Sandal, Sandali, city in Hind,
vii, 395, 396, 401 seq.
king of, entertained by
Bahram Gu1, vii, 140 seq.
Sanja, a div, ii, 39, 40, 44, 55;
Ive 29015) Vv, 204
Sanscrit, vii, 382
Sapad, mountain.
data.
Sapandairmad.
mad.
Sapinud, daughter of Shangul, vi,
353) Vil, rAd
married to Bahram Gur,
vii, 128
finds out who her husband is,
vu, 131
plans Bahram Gur’s flight
from Hind, vii, 132
reproached by Shangul, vii,
135
converted to Zoroastrian-
ism, vil, 139
visited by Shangul, vii, 142
Sapor I (Shapur son of Ardshir
g.v.), Sasanian king, vi,
294, 321
Sapor II (Shapur son of Urmuzd
q.v.), Sasanian king, i,
374; V, 133 Vi, 294, 321 ;
vill, 41
Sapor III (Shapur son of Sha-
put g2v-)h. vi,, 365
Sarakhs, city in Khurasan, be-
tween Nishapur and Marvy,
li, 108

See Spento-

See Sipandar-
GENERAL

Saraparda, i, 84

Sarcostemma_ viminale. See
Homa.
Sargon I. of Agani, v, 293
foundling legend of,  v,
393
Sati, city in Mazandaran, i, 230,
250) 83005 Vi Lian VOLE
237; Vili, 168, 341, 355,
3025.41), 86
Iranian captives imprisoned
at, 1, 363

released, i, 367
Sar-i-pul-i-Zohab, vii, 187
Sarkab, Ruman general, viii, 281,

292
Sarkash (Sergius), minstrel, 174,

vill, 193, 398 seq. 406

Story of, 174, viii, 396
disgrace of, viii, 399

Sarkhan. See Sifarai.

Saruch, desert in Kirman, ii, 226
vii, 362

Sarig, Jacob of, Syriac poet.
See Jacob.

Sarv, king of Yaman, T40, i, 211,
286); ‘Vv, 260.5 Vi, 73
daughters of, asked in mar-
riage by Fa1idun for his
sons, i, 178
consults his chiefs, i, 179
agrees, conditionally, to
Faridun’s request, i, 181
attempts to outwit Fari-
dun’s sons, i, 183 seq.
gives his daughters in mar-
riage to Faridtin’s sons, i,
185
Sarv=Azad Sarv, q.v.
Sasan, eponym of Sasdnian dyn-
asty, vili, 219, 220, 330,
341
Sasan, son of Bahman, ii 3; v
290
disinherited and flees from
court, v, 291
account of, v, 291
Sasan, name of Dard’s son and
several of his descendants,
it 3); ‘Vi; 200, 21x, 224,
255; 1x, 105 and nole

,

 

INDEX 361

Sasan, descendants of, help Ard-
shir Papakan, vi, 22
House of, vi, 251, 270 and

note
lineage of, ix, 56, 105 and
note
Sasan, father of Ardshir Papa-
kdn, 160, vi, 3, 193, 198,
200, 201, 240
legend of, vi, 211 seq.
marries daughter of Papak,
leer
Sasanian, Sdsanians, i, II, 374;
TO mvew oe Ol ec) Vion,
200, 225, 2535257 5. Vils
O58 55 224287 Ga Val, OS;
72, 73, 214, 262, 330, 413
note ; ix, 4, 5, 46, 47, 50,
54, 65, 72, 73, 76, 77; 83,
105
dynasty, i, 49, 3743; li, 10;
WE LO 2O2 Vib 2ZAQnSeg.,
2hgn 257 Seu Vil) te Sees
BOL Ge Vil 735 oS 4
Tabari on the rise of the,
vi, 198
characterised, vi, 249
Zoroastrianism under, vi,
251
Mas’tdi on Church and
State under, vi, 251
duration of, vi, 257
empire, i, II; vi, 193, 327;
vill, 193
conquered by the Arabs,
ix, 65 seq.
genealogical table of, vi, 3,
253
Tabari’s history of, vi, 14
note
fictitious genealogies of, v,
290; vi, 199, 211, 256
view of Sikandar, vi, 15, 22¢
and nole, 240 and note
rivalry with Arsacids, viii,
73 wee
usage, Vili, 190
architecture, villi, 193
race vill, 285, 386, note
Satire, Firdausi’s, on Sultan
Mahmud, i, 40 seq.
362

Satrapy, satrapies, Nushirwan’s
four ix, 69

Saturn, planet, i, 72, 100, 161,
204, 245, 295, 311; il,
LOS 2056205 6247, 203-
310; 310) 3045 4073) Il

32, 10, 178, 232, 237, 254,
AA Noe Syittey Suh Buen uch &
v, 68, 89, 136, 154, 159,
220,233) Vi, O7, DE5 170;
Phat Silo yor = Ait, Ope
LSE, 252, 2075340, 408;
Vili, 24, 66, 321, 392, 3953
ix, 73
sphere of, ix, 92
Sav (the Sévbar of the Pahlavi
texts, now Chashmah-i-
Sabz), a lake among the
hills in the neighbourhood
of Tus and Mashad, 163,
vi, 373, 392
legend of, vi, 372, 391 seq.
Savalan, mountain in Azarbaijan
v, 14
Sawa, Turanian hero, 149, ili, 224
slain by Rustam, ili, 224
Sawa, franian hero, v, 154
left in charge of the Brazen
Hold by Asfandiyar, i,
154
1uler of the Turks, 170;
vill, 74, 94 Seq., 100 seq.,
107, 108, 110 seg., 123, 129
132, 133, 135, 137, 139,
164, LOO; S174, 210, 210;
222, 224, 240
=Chao-wou, viii, 72
attacks Hurmuzd, viii, 92
letter of, to Hurmuzd, viii,

Sawa,

93

prophecy about, viii, 98

Hurmuzd sends_ Kharrad,

son of Barzin, to, vili, 110

hears of Bahram Chubina’s
army and blames Kharrad
vill, IIO

offers of, to Bahram Chu-
bina, vili, 113 seq., 117 seq.

employs sorcery against the
franians, viii, 123

defeated and slain, vili, 126

|

 

GENERAL INDEX

Sawa, head of, set on lance, viii,

130
wealth of, sent to Hurmuzd,

vill, 133

Sawurg, Indian king, 159, vi, 64,
118

Sayce, Professor, on the Ama-
zons, vi, 71

| Scandinavians, vi, 73

found the Russian empire,
vi, 19

| Scimitar of Salm, iv, 335 seq.

Scotland, vi, 79
vitrified forts in, vi, 79
Scribe, scribes, office of, highly
esteemed, i, 27 and note ;
vii, 311; viii, 50
put to death by Hur-
muzd, viii; 71, 81 seq.

Scriptures, Zoroastrian. See
Zandavasta.

Scylla, Nisus and, story of, vi,
323 note

Scythia, iv, 316

Scythians (Sacae), their relations
with the Iranians, i, 17
wars of, with Darius Hys-
tapsis, v, II

Seasons, confusion of the, ix, 77
note

Sects, Muhammadan, i, 99

parable of, i, 107

| Seleucia (Bih Ardshir q.v.), city

on the right bank of the
Tigris, opposite to Ctesi-
phon (Taisafun), ii, 80;
vi, 254, 291 note, 322 ; viii,
189, 194, 196
Semiramis, legendary queen of
Assyria, historically Sam-
muramat, wife (?) of
Samsi Adad king of Assy-
Tia (B.c. 824-804), li, 10;
vi, 66, 405 note
legend of, v, 292, 293
Humai and, v, 292, 293

| Semites, the, i, 9

relations of, with the fran-

ians, i, 9 seq., ix, 05
Seneca the younger, Nero’s tutor
(B.C. 3—A.D. 65), vil, 279
GENERAL INDEX

Seoses (Stifarai ?), Persian com-
mander-in-chief, lemp.
Kubad, vii, 187

Sergiopolis, viii, 188

Sergius, Saint and Martyr, viii,
188

patron saint of Khusrau
Parwiz, viii, 188, 195

Roman leader in Tabari,
viii, 188
Sergius (Sarkash), minstrel, viii,
193

Serpent, serpents, on Zahhak’s
shoulders, i, 139
worship and human sacri-
fice, i, 143
Seven, favourite number in Per-
sian story, vii, 186, 280,
Banquets of Nushirwan. See
Banquet.
Climes. See Climes.
Courses (Haft Khwan) of
Rustam. See Rustam.
Planets. See Planet.
| Persian nobles, legend of the
vi, 207
transferred to Ardshir
Papakan (?), vi, 207
Stages (Haft Khwan) of As-
fandiyar. See Asfandi-
yar.
Warriors, Fight of the, 143,
ii, 25, 82, 107 seq.
Founts, jewel, viii, 392
and forty Shahs, vili, 395
and note
Severus, Roman Emperor (A.D.
146-211), vi, 322
Hatra besieged by, vi, 322
Shabahang, Farhad’s steed, iu,
3135 18,6
Bizhan’s steed, iv, 47
Shabdiz, Bahram Gur’s steed,
vii, 37, 80
Giv’s steed, iil, 257
Luhrasp’s steed, iv, 323
taken by Gushtasp, iv,

323
Mihrab’s steed, i, 326
Khusrau Parwiz’ steed, viii,
407; ix, 30

363

Shabrang, Bahram Gur'’s steed,
vii, 37, 80
Bizhan’s steed, iil, 296, 302,
3%3:,. 1¥;.8,; 39, 50, 119,
124
| Shadan son of Barzin, one of
Firdausi’s authorities, i,
67, 69; vii, 382, 423
Shaddad, son of ’Ad, legend of,
i, 100
Shadward, treasure, viii, 406 and
note
| Shaghad, son of Zal, 157, v,
261
Story of Rustam and, 157, v,
260 seq.
provenance of, v, 260
birth of, v, 263
astrologers’ evil prognostic
of, v, 264
sent to be brought up at
Kabul, v, 264
marries the daughter of the
king of Kabul, v, 264
king of Kabul and, plot
against Rustam, v, 265
seq.
pretended quartel of, with
the king of Kabul, v, 266
goes to Zabul, v, 267
cause of, taken up by
Rustam, v, 267
persuades Rustam to go
with Zawara and a small
escort to Kabul, v, 268
warns the king of Kabul of
Rustam’s coming, v, 269
glories over Rustam, v, 271
outwitted and slain by
Rustam, v, 272
corpse of, burnt, v, 277
Shah, accession of, ceremony at,
vi, 409
| Shah, city in Hamavaran, ii, 89
| Shahabad, the modern name for
the ruins of Gund-i-Sha-
| pur in Khuzistan, vi, 295
leShahd,» iver i, LOS; iW Tr
PLOY DiS; 123, 152; 173,
| 230, 241; Vi, 391, 392
Shahd, mountain, ili, 237

 
364

Shahnama (Bastan-nama, Khu-

dai-nama), 139, 1, 66; ix,
4 Seq., 43, 50, 61, 70

subject-matter of, how pre-
served, i, 56

origin of, 1, 65 seq.

put into writing, i, 66

Prose, compilers of, referred
LOmnviliew 773

probably compiled by Magi,

1, 69

referred to, by Firdausi, i,
TOS, LOO) s) IV,cl LAI Seg: 5
vi, 196

more than one, i, 29, 66, 67,
69

Dakikiand. See Dakihi.
Shahnama, Firdausi’s, 739, 176,

Sy 23 1 SCQe sls aye O ye eU,
TA) 272 SO Vey OO;
136 seqg., 316, v.9. Seqg., 19,
20, 22MSEG-| 27 wSEGs, 0293,
294; vi, 3 and note, 30,
31, 66 seqg., 72, 79, 82 seq.,
194 Seq., 205 Seg., 249 Seq.,
253, 256, 270 note, 294,
301, 307, 310, 325, 320;
vii, 5, 156, 184, 185, 215,
207 307 Olas Vili eA,
A2, 71, 72; 74-Sq-, 187 seq:
TOE ELO?

scene/of, 15 3

theme of, 1, 8; 47

Baisinghar Khan’s edition
Of 123)

completion of, Firdausi on,
TOW Mn LOT

date of completion of, i, 24 ;
ioe 22:

length, metre, and language
OLA Veo elle

anomalies of, i, 48
explained, 1, 48

divisions and chief charac-
ters of, i, 49

machinery of, i, 51

leading motives of, 1, 53

cosmogony of, 1, 71 ; iv, 136

imagery of, i, 72

editions of, i, 76

translations of, i, 77, 87

GENERAL

 

| Shahram-Piruz.

INDEX

Shahnama, principles of the
present translation of, i,
77 Seq.

certain: terms used in, ex-
plained, i, 80 seq.

Firdausi on the compilation
of, i, 108

historic element in mythical
period of, iui, 8 seq.

Greek subject-matter in, vi,

11
derivation of Sikandar given
ivi zo

historic period of, i, 49; vi, 29

Tran and, analogy between,
vi, 193

portion of, corresponding to
Karnamak, vi, 196

Karnamak and, compared,
Vi, 200 seq., 255 Seq.

Wisdom-literature in, vii,
278 seq.
Shahnama, of Abu- ’Ali Muham-
mad, i, 69

Shahra, chief, 165, vii, 92
made king of Turan by
Bahram Gur, vii, 92
See Badan
Piriz.

Shahran, ix, 102

pleads with Mahwi for Yaz-
dagird, ix, 102
Shahran Guraz, [ranian warrior,
speech of, viii, 239

| Shahranguraz (Hurmuzd Shah-

ranguraz, Guraz 4q.v.),
T75 Gy AX, 50
heads conspiracy against

Guraz; ix, 54

| Shahr-Bant-Iram, sister of Giv

and wife of Rustam, ij, 4,
384
Shahrbaraz (Guraz q.v.), franian

general, viii, 194; ix, 43,
50

revolt of, viii, 195

sons of, villi, 196

rebellion of, ix, 43, 44

alliance of, with Heraclius,
ibe,

Shahr-Ba1rz. See Shahrbaraz.
GENERAL INDEX

Shahrgir, warrior in Sikandar’s
host, vi, 125, 126
takes Kaidafa’s son and
daughter-in-law p1isoners,
vi, 125
Shahrgir, captain of the host to
Ardshir Papakan, vi, 241
Ardshir’s instructions to, vi,
241
goes to Ardshir’s help, vi,
244 and note
Shahrguraz (Shahrbaraz q.v.), ix,
50
Shahrinaz, sister of Jamshid,
wife of Zahhak and Fari-
din, and mother of Salm
and Tur, i, 90, 142, 164
SCq-5 177
married to Zahhak, i, 146
sons of, by Faridun, i, 177
Shahrir, Shahrivar, ameshas-
penta, 1, 88; 111, 286, 328
month and day, i, 88; v,
BtOr, Vil, 70
Shahrwaraz (Shahrbaraz q.v.),
ix, 50
Shahrwi, archimage, vi, 329
minister during Shapur son
of Urmuzd’s minority, vi,

329
Shahryér, son of Shiin and
Khusrau Parwiz, ix, 39
father of Yazdagird, ix,
64
Shahwi, eldest son of Haftwad,
vi, 237
referred to, vi, 206
helps his father against

Aidshir Papakan, vi, 236
executed, vi, 245

Shahwi (=Mahwi ?), one of Fir-
dausi’s authorities, vii,
382, 394

Shakespeare, quoted, ili, 286;
Vv, 156 note ; vii, 383; viii
187

Shakn, region, iii, 152, 177, 185,
LQ2Z, 204, 222, 223, 226,

237
Sham (Syria), ii, 80, 84; vi, 357;
vili, 170

_ Shammias,

395

Sham, king of, taken prisoner by
Rustam, ii, 97
Shamasds, Turanian hero, r42 ;
LS aa0 el. 12; 1G
Khazarwan and, invade Ka-
‘bulistan, i, 345, 358
parleyed with by Mihrab to
gain time, i, 358
flees from Zal, i, 361
met and defeated by Karan,
i, 361
Shambalid, daughter of Barzin,
vii, 53
married to Bahram Gur, vii,

53
Shamiran, Turanian hero, ili, 185
comes to aid Piran, ili, 152
Shamiran, stronghold north of
Harat (?), ix, 91, 94
Shammakh, king of Sur, iv, 57,
146
Shammas, legendary founder of
Fire-worship, vi, 339 note
Nushzad’s general,
vii, 219, 272

| Shamta, viii, 195, 196

Shangul, king of Hind, temp.
Kai Khusrau, 149, lii, 161,
172, 185, 198, 205, 210,
ZL) 25

comes to aid Piran, iii, 152

volunteers to fight Rustam,
ili, 209, 216

challenges Rustam, iii, 221

worsted, ili, 221

temp. Bahram Gur, 165, vi,
325; vil, 109 seq.

border-raids of, vii, I10

gives audience to the fran-
ian envoy (Bahram Gur),

Vil, LiZ
state of, described, vii,
TL2

brother of, vii, 113

vaunts his own greatness,
vii, 114

wife of, the daughter of the
Faghfur, vii, 115

son of, vii, 115

entertains Bahram Gur, vii,
I16
306

Shangul, Bahram Gur wrestles

before, vii, 117

plays at polo, vii, 118

Bahram Gur displays his
markmanship before, vii,
118

tiies to find out who the
Persian envoy (Bahram
Gur) is, vii, 118 seq.

takes counsel with his sages,
vli, 126

offers a daughter and great
advancement to Bahram
Gur, vii, 127

marries Sapinid to Bahram
Gur, vii, 128 seq.

goes to a festival, vii,
134

hears of Bahram Gur’s flight
vii, 135

reproaches Sapinud, vii, 135

makes a league with Bahram
Gur, 137

bids farewell to Sapinud, vii,
137

makes a new treaty with
Bahram Gur, vii, 140

entertained with seven other

kings by Bahram Gur, vii,
140 seq.

visits his daughter Sapinud,
vli, 142

farewells Sapinud, vii, 143

makes Bahram Gur his heir,

Vili, 143

Bahram Gur’s parting gifts
to, vii, 144

sends Gipsies to Tran, vii,
149

Shapigan, treasury of, i, 61, 62
Shapur, Pishdadian hero, i, 210,
2Tsee 2s
slain, i, 352
Shapur, Kaianian hero,’ ii, 271,
338, 340; lll, 19, 289, 322,
23 lve 292
hails Gushtasp as Shah, iv,
362
Shapur, Ashkanian (Parthian)
king, vi, 197, 210

 

 

GENERAL INDEX

Shapitr, son of Papak, vi, 199
Shapur, son of Ardshir Papakan,
Shah (Sapor I), 167, i, 42;
vi, 3, 256, 303, 307, 313,
315, 321 seq., vill, 265
compilation of Zandavasta
under, i, 62, 63
stories of, in Karnamak, vi,
196, 255
Tabari, vi, 255, 257
crowned in his father’s life-
time, vi, 257
secret birth of, vi, 261

origin of name, vi, 262
note

recognised and  acknow-
ledged by Ardshir Papa-
kan, vi, 264

discovers the daughter of
Mihrak, vi, 268 seq.

summoned and counselled .
by Ardshir Papakan, vi,
286 seq.

confused with Shapur son
of Urmuzd, vi, 294, 321,
324, 327

Reign of, 262, vi, 294 seq.
Note on, vi, 294
historical inaccuracies of,
vi, 294

wars of, with Rome, vi, 294,
297

Odenathus and, vi, 294

defeats the Rutmans, vi,
297

receives tribute from Cesar,
vi, 298

builds cities, vi, 298

bids Bazanush build a bridge
at Shushtar, vi, 298

summons and counsels Ur-
muzd, vi, 299

Shaptr, son of Urmuzd, Shah

(Sapor Il),: 762, 163, 4;

374; Vi, LOnotes) “Vis
294, 295, 397, 371, 373,
405 (?); vil, 359; vill,
41

provides for uniformity of
Zoroastiian doctrine, i, 62

} May be identical with the above in legend.
GENERAL

Shaptr, son of Urmuzd, Zoroas-
trian canon closed under,
a, 63

referred to, vi, 318

Reign of, 162, vi, 321 seq.
Note on, vi, 321 seq.

bridge of, at Taisafun, vi,
321, 329

residences of, vi, 321, 330

confused with Shapur, son
of Ardshir, vi, 294, 321,
324, 327

triumphant treaty of, with
the Rumans, vi, 326, 355

cities of, vi, 327, 357

birth of, vi, 328

crowned as an infant, vi, 328

education of, vi, 329

Malika offers to betray her
father’s hold to, vi, 331
opens the gate to, vi, 333

sends Malika to his camp, vi,

333

treatment of Arab captives
by, vi, 323, 334

receives the title of Zu’l
Aktaf q.v., vi, 335

retuins to Pars and receives
tribute, vi, 335

consults the astrologers, vi,

335 :

visits Czsar in disguise, vi,
3360 —

entertained by Cesar, vi,
335i

denounced by a Persian resi-
dent at Czsar’s court, vi,
337

arrested, vi, 337

sewed up in an ass’s skin and
imprisoned, vi, 338

pitied by an franian slave- |

girl, vi, 339
freed from ass’s skin by
slave-girl, vi, 340
entertained by a gardener,
vi, 341 seq.
sends the gardener to the
high priest, vi, 344
described by the gardener,
vi, 344

 

 

INDEX 307
Shapur, praises the slave-girl, viv
346
prepares to attack Cesar,
vi, 346
sends spies to Taisaftn, vi,
346

sends tidings of his victory
over Cesar to the prov-
inces, vi, 348

treatment of Cesar by, vi,
349

invades Rim, vi, 350

defeats Yanus, vi, 352

bids Bazanush come to him,
vi, 354

dictates terms of peace, vi,
355

returns to Istakhr, vi, 356

takes Nasibin, vi, 356

names and _ honours
slave-girl, vi, 356

rewards the gardener, vi, 357

keeps Czesar captive, vi, 357

sends Cesar’s corpse to
Rum, vi, 357

arranges a disputation be-
tween Mani and the high
priest, vi, 358

Mani executed by, vi, 359

arianges for the succession
with his brother Ardshir,
vi, 360 seq.

dies, vi, 362

Shaptr, son of Shapur, Shah

(Sapor III), 1263, vi, 3,

the

PET 300%) S71) Vil, L771,
186
Ardshir, son of Urmuzd,

resigns the throne to, vi,
364
Reign of, 163, vi, 365 seq.
Note on, vi, 365
death of, vi, 366
Tabari on, vi, 365
Shapur, son of Yazdagird, king
of Armenia, vi, 373
Shaptr of Rai, Kubad’s com-
mander-in-chief, vii, 184,
185; vill, 72
summoned to overthrow
Sufarai, vii, 191
368

GENERAL INDEX

Shaptir of Rai, conference of, | Shida, refuses to interfere in the

with Kubad, vii, 192
goes to Shiraz and arrests
Sufarai, vli, 193
conveys Sufarai
Kubad, vii, 194
Shapur, franian noble, temp.
Nushirwan, vii, 304, 333
Shaptr, franian warrior, 172,
Vili, 202, 225, 257, 259,
269, 293, 296
deceived by Cesar’s talis-
man, vili, 273
praised by Cesar,
279
Bahram Chubina writes to,
vill, 285
receives Istakhr and Darab-
gird, villi, 313
Shaptr, father of Piruz,
80
Shapur Gird (Gund-i-Shapur q.v.)
city, vi, 295, 298
Shatt-al-Arab, the combined
streams of the Tigtis and
Euphrates, ix, 67
Shawaran, franian hero, I5T, ii,
72) OO ume Zon 2A 0.6250;
255) 27k, Qlomill. 20, 345
43, 45, 48, 67, 115, 334,
lv, 97, 105, 147, 275
Shawwal, the tenth Muham-
madan month, vi, 208
Sheep’s heads, Bahram Chubina
and the, villi, 74, 107
omen of, reported to Hur-
muzd, viii, 108
Shem, patiiarch, vi, 65
Shepherds, Kai Khusrau brought
up by, li, 328 seq.
Sher-kappi, vili, 322 nole
Shiban, vi, 397
Shida (Pashang), son of Afra-
siyab, 152, i, 92; li, 262,
350; iv, 10 seq., 15, 135,
156, 158 seq., 206, 222,
287, 290
consulted by his father, i,
250 seq.
goes on embassy to Pulad-
wand, ili, 255

to Shah

vill,

xs

 

fight between Rustam and
Puladwand, iii, 363

sent by Afrasiyab to Kha-
TAaAZzie Lvs ee

defeated by Ashkash, iv,
60, 72

commands the left wing,
155

surname of, meaning of, iv,
155 note

urges Afrasiyab to attack
Kai Khusiau, iv, 159

Afrasiyab’s 1eply to,
160

wishes to meet Kai Khus-
rau in single combat, iv,
161

goes on an embassage to
Kai Khusrau, iv, 161

skirmish of, with Iranian ©
outposts, iv, 164

welcomed by Karan,
165

mail and steed of, iv, 168

receives KailXhusrau’s reply,
iv, 170

returns to Afrasiyab, iv, 170

goes to fight Kai Khusrau,
iv, 171

parley of, with Kai Khus-
TAI SuRl Ves ele

challenges Kai Khusrau to
a wrestling-bout, iv, 173

urged by his interpreter to
flee from Kai Khusrau, iv,
174

refuses, iv, 174

wrestles and is overthrown,
iv, 175

Kai Khusrau instructs Ruh-
ham to bury, iv, 176

Shidasp, minister to Tahmuras,

iv,

iv,

iv,

ene 7
| Shidasp, son of Gushtasp, 155,
Lig93 GeV 20356
death of, foretold by Jamasp
Vv, 50
given command of one wing,
Ve55

slain, v, 58
GENERAL

Shidush, [ranian hero, i, 211 ; ii,
58, 85, 158, 340; Ui, 33,
45, 48, 127, 129, 130, 139,
141, 157, 248, 253; 1v,
Dae Theo Lor
with Karan and Kishwad,
pursues Kurakhan, i, 354
put in command of the
rear, iv, 92
Kai Khusrau remonstrated
with by, and other nobles,
for refusing audience, iv,
Shi'ite, Shi'ites, Muhammadan
SOCi ate sis
origin of, 1, 13
Firdausi a, i, 2
Shikban, frdnian warrior,
395
Shiknan, place, vii, 359
Shingan, region, ili, 228, 238;
lv, 65
Shiraz, city in Pars (Farsistan),
166, i, 236; vi, 198 note,
BXO)s) Vile 0; 173,.L00, 193,
194
Shirin, wife of Khusrau Parwiz,
I74, 175, viii, 187, 194,
363, 383, 407; ix, 28, 36
enmity of, to Shirwi, viii,
189, I9I, 193
account of, vili, 192
Khusrau and, Persian poem,
Vili, 192
meaning of, viii, 193
Maryam murdered by, viii,
193, 389
a Christian, vill, 195
warns <Khusrau  Parwiz
against Gurdya, vill, 364
Khusrau Parwiz and, ix, 7
Story of, 174, viii, 382
married to, vili, 386
gilded chamber given to,
vill, 389
hears Kubad proclaimed
Shah, viii, 416
informs Khusrau_ Parwiz,
vill, 416
has charge of Shirwi’s horo-
SCOPE; 1x, £6

vi,

VOL. Ix.

 

INDEX 399
Shirin, has charge of Raja’s letter
ee antl 7

companions Khusrau Par-
wiz in prison, ix, 29
reproached and summoned
by Shirwi, ix, 36
makes her Will, ix, 36
goes to Court, 1x, 37
justifies heiself, ix, 38, 4o
exonerated, ix, 38, 41
sons of, ix, 39
unveils to the Court, ix, 39
Shirwi enamoured of, ix, 39
makes request of Shirwi, ix,
40, 41
goes home, ix, 40
distributes her wealth, ix, 4o
frees her slaves, 1x, 41
poisons herself, ix, 42
Shirkhan (Shirvan, district and
town west of the Caspian
between the Kur river and
Darband ?), i, 169

| Shirkhuin, a Zabuli, v, 184

guides Bahman to Rustam,
v, 184
Shirt, son of Gushtasp, 155, v, 26
slain, v, 57
Shirtya, son of Bizhan, iv, 36c
goes with Zarir to Rim, iv,
360
Shirwan (Shirvan ?)
See Shirkhan.
Shirwi, [ranian hero, i, 207, 215
helps to take the Castle of
the Alans, i, 223 seq.
conveys the spoil to Faridun,
1, 230, 232
Shirwi, Nushirwan’s commander-
in-chief, vii, 251
appointed to receive the
Ruiman tribute, vil, 262

iii 216:

| Shirwi (Kubad g.v.), Shah, 274,

I75, viii, 188, 190, 37
SOG ky Te OLE 27, 2
31 seq., 36, 45, 47, O4
Shirin’s enmity to, viii, 18
191, 193
internment of, viii, 1
391
released, viii, 196, 415
AA

   
 
 
319

Sh‘rwi (Kubad),secret and public
names of, viii, 372, 416
astrologers consulted at
birth of, vill, 372
ill-omened horoscope of, viii,
3/2 ALO
referred to, viii, 373, 390
kept by Shirin, ix, 16
Khusrau- Parwiz gives
Cesar’s gifts to, vill, 381
boorishness of, vill, 390
Kkhusrau Parwiz’ displeasure
with, vill, 390
sends to take Khusrau Par-
wiz, vill, 419
Reign of, 2775, ix, 3
Note on, 1x, 3
Length of, ix, 42
treatment of Khusrau Par-
wiz by, ix, 7
writes to Heraclius, ix, 7
Ashtad and Kharrad report
their interview with Khus-
rau Parwiz to, ix, 27
reproaches and summons
Shirin, ix, 36, 37
falls in love with Shirin, ix,

39
grants Shirin’s requests, ix,
4°, 42

poisoned, ix, 42
son of, ix, 42
Shirzad, herald in Nushirwan’s
host, vii, 252
franian warrior,
290
Shiz (Takht-i-Sulaiman), seat of
the Magi in Azarbaijan, i,
60 ; viii, 190
Fire-temple at, vii, 5
Khatin sent to, vii, 5
Shoemaker, Bahram Gur and
the, 164, vii, 24
Nushirwan and_ the,
vii, 218, 260
offer of, to advance money
to Nushirwan, vili, 48
rejected, viii, 50, 71
g},u'ba Mughira, companion of
“vthe Prophet, ix, 69, 83
emt @SSY Ot, Txes09. oO?

Shirzil, viii,

169,

GENERAL ‘INDEX

Shu’ib, Arab chief, 758, vi, 21
attacks Darab, vi, 21
defeated and slain, vi, 22

Shilak, Gushtasp’s steed
(Dakiki), v, 73

Asfandiyar’s steed  (Fir-
dausi), v, 126

Shuirab (Sura), city on the

Euphrates, east of

Antioch, vii, 217
place of Gushtasp’s exile,
vli, 254
taken by Nushirwan,
217, 254
Shursan, vi, 379

vii,

| Shus (Sus, Susa), city on the.

Karkhah river north west
of Shuishtar in Khuzistan,
51, 327,

Shushtar, Shustar, city on the
Dujayl (Karin) river in-
Khuzistan, vi, 199, 295
and note, 299; vili, 381

dam and bridge at, vi, 298,
326

| Sicily, vi, 30

Alexander the Great’s legen-
dary visit to, vi, 30

| Siege-operations, iii, 246 ; iv, 208

seq.; vii, 254, 257

Signs, the Twelve (Zodiac), vii,
408

Sigz, man of (Rustam), ii, 100
and note; ili, 183, 209,
Qo 220

| Sigzian, a native of Sigz, v, 226

and note 228
= Rustam, iil, 200, 225, 227;
Vv, 241
=Zawara, v, 226, 228
=Faramarz, v, 228
Sikandar (Iskandar, Alexander
- the Great, g.v.), Shah, 158-
FOO, 1,42, 49); 1153, Sisedag
Vi, 30) Vi, TI, 13) UO ;emes

29, 39, 33, 193, 210, 240
and note, 325, 353; Vill,
52, 204, 257, 242 ,eee0e.

381, 387, 392; 1x, 26
paternity of, i, 55 and
note
GENERAL

Sikandar, derivation of, in Ta-

bari, vi, 19

derivation of, in Shahnama,
vi, 19, 26

birth of, vi, 18, 26

adopted as his heir by Faila-
kus, vi, 2

counselled by Arastalis, vi,

35

refuses tribute to Dara, vi,
36

prepares for war with Dara,
vi, 37

invades, and defeats king of,
Misr, vi, 30, 37
fran, vi, 30, 37 seq.

visit of, to the camp of Dara,
vi, 38

invited to banquet with
Dara, vi, 40

takes the golden cups of
Dara, vi, 40

recognised, vi, 40

escapes, vi, 41

defeats Dara, vi, 43, 44, 46

issues proclamation to the
franians, vi, 44,47 .

gives the spoil to his troops,
vi, 44, 47

marches from ‘Irak against
Dara, vi, 46

enters Istakhr, vi, 46

answers Dara’s letter, vi, 50

marches from Istakhr, vi, 51

hears of Dara’s murder, vi,
52

arrests Dara’s murderers, vi,

53

finds Dara still living, vi, 53

promises to avenge Dara, vi,
53

promises to carry out Dara’s
last wishes, vi, 54

Dara bestows Rtshanak
upon, vi, 55, 86

laments for, and _ buries,
Dara, vi, 55, 56

executes Dara’s murderers,
vi, 50

hailed as ruler by the fran-
ians, vi, 56

 

 

INDEX 371

Sikandar, sends envoys to Ispa-

han and to the family of
Dara, and letters to the
provinces, to announce
his accession, vi, 57

crowned Shah at Istakhr,
vi, 59

Reign of, 158, vi, 60 seq.
Note on, vi, 60 seq.

diagram to illustrate Per-
sian Romance of, vi, 84

inaugural address of, vi, 85

correspondence of, with the
the wife and daughter of
Dara, vi, 33 86, seq.

marries Ruishanak, vi, 90

invades Hind, vi, 98

Kaid and, vi, 61, 98

approaches Milad, vi, 61, 98

inquires about the Four
Wonders of Kaid, vi, 100

Four Wonders and _ other
gifts sent by Kaid to, vi,
103

marries daughter of Kaid, vi
104

sage of Kaid and, vi, 62, 104
seq.

principle of the cup ex-
plained to, vi, 109

conceals his treasures, vi,
I1o and nole

advances to Kannuj, vi, 110

troops of, protest, vi, 113

remonstrates with his troops
Vip alts

troops of, ask pardon, vi,
114

war of, with Fur (Porus), vi,
67, I10O seq.

hears of Fii1’s elephants, vi,
115
his device to overcome, vi,

115

challenges Fur to single
combat, vi, 116

slays Fur, vi, 117

Fur’s troops submit to, vi,
118

becomes king of Hind, vi,
118
372

Sikandar,

GENERAL

bestows Hind on
Sawurg, vi, 118

visit of, to Mecca and the
Kaaba, vi, 64, 67, 119 seq.

ends the rule of the Khuza’
in Arabia, vi, 120

sets up Nasr instead of the
Khuza’, vi, 120,

goes to Judda, vi, 121

marches to Misr, vi, 121
welcomed by king of, vi,

121

stays for a year in, vi, 121

Kaidafa (Candace) and, vi,
vi, 65, I21 seq.

portrait of, obtained by
Kaidafa, vi, 122

Kaidafa praised by Kabtun
to), vi; 122

writes to Kaidafa, vi, 123

Kaidafa’s answer to, vi, 123

assumes the name of Nait-
kun (Antigonus), vi, 66,
125 seq. .

pleads (as Naitktn) for
Kaidrush and his wife, vi,
126

goes (as Naitkun) to Kai-
dafa, vi, 127

graciously received by Kai-
dafa, vi, 128

audiences of, with Kaidafa,
vi, 128 seq.

recognised by Kaidafa, vi,
129 seq.

delivers his message, as
envoy, to Kaidafa, vi 129,
134

covenant of, with Kaidafa,
Vi, 132, 138

warned by Kaidafa against
Tainush, vi, 133

insulted by Tainush, vi, 134

counsels Kaidafa about Tai-
nush, vi, 135

covenant of, with Tainiush,
vi, 136

Kaidafa’s gifts to, vi, 140

returns with Tainush, vi, 141

welcomed by his troops, vi,

T41

 

INDEX

Sikandar, reveals himself to Tai-

nush, vi, 142

entertains at a banquet,
gives gifts to, and dis-
misses, Tainush, vi, 143

final message of, to Kaidafa,
vi, 143

Brahmans hear of the com-
ing of, and write to, vi,
143

interview of, with the Brah-
mans, vi, 67, 144 seq.

quits the Brahmans, vi, 147

Fish-eaters (Ichthyophagi,
q.v.) and, vi, 69, seqg., 147,
177

adventure of, with a whale,
Vi, 7 iy Lay

sees gigantic reeds
boos), vi, 71, 148

attacked by snakes, scor-
pions, and boars, vi, 148
the people of Habash, vi,
149
the Narmpai, vi, 150

adventure of, with a dragon,
Viale fis aust

visits the temple of Diony-
sus, vi, 7I, 152, 166

warned of his death, vi, 152,
I61, 166

marches toward Harum, the
City of Women (Amazons
q.U.), Vi, 153 seq.

encounters snow and frost,
vi, 156

encounters great heat, vi,
157

encounters the negroes, vi,
7,

reaches and inspects Hartim,
vi, 157

marches westward and finds
a fair-haired race, vi, 73,
158

hears of the Gloom, g.v., and
of the Fount of Life, q.v.,
and prepares to visit them
vi, 158

sets forth with
guide, vi, 159

(bam-

Kkhisr as
 

GENERAL INDEX 373

Sikandar, Khisr and, part com-

pany, vi, 160

fails to find the Fount of
Life, vi, 160

interview of, with birds, vi,
160

interview of, with Israfil, vi,
78, 161

emerges from the Gloom, vi,
162

matches eastward, vi, 163

hears of Yajuj and Majuj,
vi, 163

barrier of, 160, i, 16; vi, 78,
164, 249

Speaking Tree visited by, vi,
167 seq. See Tree.

reaches ‘‘ The World’s
End,” vi, 168

receives gifts, vi, 169

expedition of, to Chin, vi,
80, 169 seq.

goes as his own ambassador
to the Faghftir, vi,
170

describes himself, vi, 171

Faghfur’s gifts to, vi, 173

departs with Faghfur’s en-
voy, Vi, 173

identity of, discovered by
the envoy, vi, 173

dismisses the envoy with
gifts and a message to
Faghfur, vi, 174

arlives at Chaghwan, vi,
174

marches to Sind, vi, 175

defeats Bandawa, chief of
the Sindians, vi, 175

marches to Nimrwtz, vi,

175

receives gifts from the king
of Yaman, vi, 175

meets Gush-bistar, vi, 177

carries off the treasuies of
Kai Khusrau, vi, 178

policy of, for safeguaiding
Rum after his decease, vi,
St; 178;,.107

adopts the advice of Aras-
talis, vi, 180

Sikandar, arrives at Babil, vi,
180
prodigious birth at, vi, 81,
180
consults the astrologers
on, vi, 180
warned of his end, vi, 180
sickens, vi, 181
Will of, vi, 81, 181
grief of the troops for, vi,
183, 184
dies, vi, 183
dispute as to burial of, vi,
184
body of, taken to Iskanda-
riya, vi, 185
sentences of sages over, vi,
82, 83, 185
cities of, vi, 83, 189
Zoroastiian and Sdasdnian
view of, i, 59 and nole, 61
seq. ; vi, 15 and note, 224,
240; vii, 79 and note

| Silk, account of} vi, 204

 

introduction of, into the

West, vi, 204

Silk-worm. See Silk.

Silvia, vestal, v, 293

Simah Barzin, scribe, Hurmuzd
plots against, 170, vili, 85,
seq.

Simmas, chief herdsman _ of
Ninus, v, 292

_ Simurgh, mythical bird, 156, 157,

Te 5k DSS. 30s. 330.
Vv, 117, 132 seqg., 166, 246,
248, 255

described, i, 235 and note,
253, 276, 302, 326, v, 132

nest of, on Mount Alburz, i,
241, 244, 250

young of, i, 242, 250, v, 132,
133

finds and biings up the in-
fant Zal, i, 242

informs Zl of his parentage,
1, 245

gives Zal one of her feathers,
i, 246, 321
their efficacy, i, 246, 320

restores Zal to Sam, i, 247
374

Simurgh, referred to, 1, 251
succours Rudaba, i, 320 seq.
foretells Rustam’s future
greatness, i, 321

slain by Asfandiyar, v, 133

summoned to Rustam’s aid
by Zal, v, 235 seq.

heals Rustam and Rakhsh,
V3, 237,

instructs Rustam how to
overcome Asfandiyar, v,
237

Sind, the river Indus and the

parts adjacent, i, 113; ii,
285 ; iil, 10 note, 117, 185,
20; 238) tN, 205.5 Files ave
75 TSO, 2038) 277-5 Vil, ih:
Vil), LLO- EE, 6390

king Of it eres); eavipaera
entertained by Bahram
Gur, vil, 140 seq.

kings of, send tribute to
Gushtasp, v, 75

chiefs of, vi, 123

warriors of, vi, 132, 137

Sikandar marches to, vi, 175

Sindbad, the sailor, vi, 71
lands on a whale, vi, 71

Sinde, river, ili, to and note

Sindian, Sindians, I60, vii, 126
defeated by Sikandar, vi,

175
Sindukht, wife of Mihrab and
mother of Ruidaba, r47, 1,
259, 299
Mihrab praises Zal to, i, 260
discovers the loves of Zal
and Rudaba, i, 281
reproaches Rudaba, i, 282
informs Mihrab about Zal
and Rudaba, i, 284
goes with gifts to Sam, i,
300 seq.
well received by Sam, i, 302
invites Sam to visit Kabul,
i, 305
returns to Kabul, i, 306
hears of Zal’s success with
Mintichihr, i, 315
felicitates Rudaba, 1, 315
1Cf. Vol. v., p. 30.

 

 

 

 

GENERAL. INDEX

Sindukht, Mihrab and, prepare
to welcome Sam and Zal,
LOLs okey
entertain Sam and Zal, i,
317 Seq.
visit Sam in Sistan, i, 319
Sinjibu, first historical Khan of
the Turks, vii, 317
relations of, with Nushir-
wan, vii, 317
Haitalians and, vii, 317
Sipahram, Turanian hero, 751 ;
1) 228.1220), 388 5) Ave 20:
103
chosen to fight with Hajir,
iv, 97
slain by Hajir, iv, 104
Sipand (Spentd-data, g.v., Spen-
dyad, Sapad, White
Castle), mountain north-
west of Nishapur, r42, i,
277A, SL Oyen Vs (3 Om allos
D7,
Malcolm ’s identification and
desciiption of,1 i, 236
Zal bids Rustam take, i, 329
described, 1, 329
taken by Rustam, i, 331
treasures of, i, 331, 332
hold of, destroyed by Zal’s
orders, i, 333
Sipandarmad, ameshaspenta,
Gear, 1, 287, 3205 ule
month) 1 9So);. dve252" 5) ex
FO L22
day, i, 88, 89, vili, 331
Sipanjab (Farghana ?), region, 1,
375; Ul, 241, 342, 344, 345
355); is 151
Sipansar, [ranian walTior, Vill, 293
Sistan = Nimriz = Zabulistan,?
144, 149, 155, ; i, 3193
li, 80, 335, 365; ili, 165,
L660; TOL, 207; =321, 3350),
1V,)04, 278.5. VinE3; L7n2os
85, 86, 89, 94, 173, 174,
201," 220; 248, 201,204,
207 5 Vii32,, Looms Vile
former capital of, i, 4
lake of, i, 4; v, 239 note
® See p. 333 note.
 

GENERAL INDEX

Sistan, origin of name, i, 19
invaded by Shamasds and
Khazarwan, i, 358
mourning in, for Rustam, v,
278
invaded by Bahman, v, 284
seq.
Sitir, Persian measure of weight,
ili, 184
Sitth, Turanian hero, v, 86, 87
goes as a spy to [ran and
reports to Arjasp, v, 86,

87
Siyah Chasm, slave of Farrukh-
zad, ix, 62

handmaid of Farrukhzad
and, ix, 62
imprisoned, ix, 62
released, ix, 62
poisons Farrukhzad, ix, 63
Siyamak, son of Gaitimart, 139,
RELA. LG
slain by the Black Div, i, 120
lamentations Over, 1, 120
Siyamak, Turdanian hero, 157, iv,

97
chosen to fight with Guraza,
lv, 97
slain by Guraza, iv, 100
Siyavakhsh. See Siyawush.
Siyavashana. See Siyawush.
Siyawush, son of Kai Kaus, and
father of Farid and Kai
Khusrau, 144-148, ; i, 55,
92; li, 3, 25, 82, 104 note
187 seq., 335, 338 seq., 346
seq-, 363, 371, 372, 374
seq., 383, 386, 388, 396,
AOS Aus 1, 9,05, 00; 10}
235 22,29, 39, 425.43, 535
52, 57, 66, 67, 71, 72, 87,
93, 99, 112, 117, 118, 137,
146, 148, 149, 156, 163,
183, 197, 199, 200, 201, 203
SCG.,.22%,, 2I4, 220,237;
238, 256, 283, 289, 297,
397, 315, 324, 347; iV, 7,
17, 18, 34, 50, 51, 70 Seq.,
89, 90, 95, 96, 102, 109,
120, 129,"'120,, 130,, 137,
152, 159, 162, 167, 168,

375

Siyawush—cont,
172, 20I, 202, 204, 205,
PIAL Ee Sel, 228, 237,
295 eed Oy 250; 252; 257)
207, 270, 271,283; 205;
289, 299, 305, 307, 310;

v, 174, 176, 192, 208, 272 ;
viii, 104, 349, 395 note;
ix, 25 and nole, 26 note,
103
mother of, 744, li, 3
Story of, 144, ii, 188 seq.
Note on, ii, 188 seq.
good example of Fir-
dausi’s method, 1i, 188
Prelude to, ii, 191
identical with Cambyses,
the father of Cyrus the
Great, in legend, ii, 191
adventure of the mother of,
ll, 193
destined to misfortune from
birth, ii, 196
brought up by Rustam, ii,
196
horoscope of, ii, 196, 205,
234
returns to court, ii, 197
made ruler of Kuhistan, il,
199
mourns for his
death, li, 199
temptation of, by Sudaba,
li, 200 seq.
marches against Afrasiyab,
li, 225 seq.
demands hostages of Afra-
slyab, li, 239 seq.
goes over to Afrasiyab, ui,
258 seq.
plays at polo with Afrasiyab
li, 264
archery of, ii, 266, 293
matriage of, with Jatira, ii,
268 seq.
marriage of, with Faiangis,
li, 270 seq.
entertained by Piran, ii, 278
builds cities, li, 278 seq.
consults the astrologers, ii,
282

mother’s
376
Siyawush, foretells the future to
Piran, ii, 282 seq.

entertains Piran, ii, 287

entertains Garsiwaz, li, 290
seq.

plays at polo with Garsiwaz,
Te2O?:

challenged by Garsiwaz, ii,
204

overthrows Gurwi and Da-
mur, li, 295

slandered by Garstwaz to
Afrasiyab, ii, 296 seq.

summoned to court
Afrasiyab, ii, 300 seq.

betrayed by Garstwaz, ii,
301 seq.

excuses himself from going
to court, ii, 306

passion of, li, 307 seq.

foretells the future to Faran-
gis, li, 310 seq.

by

charges and turns loose
Bihzad, ii, 312
attacked and taken by

Afrasiyab, ii, 314
execution of, li, 320
referred to, iv, 268
Blood of (plant), ii, 321
birth-mark of, iii, 49
mail of, ili, 58, 60, 61, 69, 81,
iv, 40 seq., 51
murderer of = Afrasiyab, iv,
198
garth of=Siyawushgird, iv,
238
goods of, viii, 148, 151
Siyawush, franian chief, 172;
Will, 128) 1035 187-5233
son of =Bahram, vili, 247
Siyawush, wild duck, ii, 104
note ‘
Siyawushgird, city built by Siya-
wush, 145, 146, 753; iu,

301, 314, 3733 IV, 250,
252

building and description of,
li, 285 seq.

becomes the home of Kai
Khusrau, li, 333
referred to, iv, 238

GENERAL

INDEX
Skirts, binding together of, in

battle, iv, 85 and note, 177
and note, 209

| Slavs, vili, 194

| Sohrab

 

| Span-dat-nama

Smerdis, the false, v, II ; vi, 207
Snakes=Arabs, ix, 91
Snowstorm, iil, 108
franian host distressed by,
Ll, 71 ZO Gu LS VeRO
paladins of Kai Khusrau
lost in, iv, 308 seq.
and Rustam, Matthew
Arnold’s, 11, 118
Sol, planet, vili, 395

Soma. See Homa.
Son of Firdausi, death of, viii,
190

Song, of a div, li, 31
of Rustam, ii, 51
of Asfandiyar, v, 129
of the daughter of Barzin,
Vil, 52
of the daughter of Mahiyar,
vii, 60, 61, 66
Sophia, Empress, her treatment
of Narses, viii, 76

| Sorcerer, a Jewish, brings about

the death of Nushirwan’s
minister, Mahbud, vii, 320

seq.
| Sorceress, Rustam and a, 143, li,
50 seq.
Suidaba and a, 144, il, 214
Seq.
Asfandiyar and a, 156, v, 128
seq.
Séshyans, the Zoroastrian Mes-
siah, 1, 131

| Souterrain, ti, 137 iv, 212

Spain (Andalus), vi, 66
Spand-dat (Spento-data, Asfan-

diyar), v, 24 seq.
(Asfandiyar—
nama), V, 26, 27

| Speaking Tree, the, 260. See
Tree.

Speech, modes of, viii, 30

Spendyad, mountain. See
Spenté-data.

Spenté-data (Spand-dat, As-

fandiyar q.v.), v, 12
 

GENERAL INDEX

Spenté-data (Spendyad, Sapad,
Sipand q.v. ), mountain
north-west of Nishapur,
WTS) V, 30,116 cry
Sphinés. See Calanus.
Spica, star, i, 245, 271; viii, 379
Spitama, clan name of Zarduhsht
(Zoroaster), i, 236; iv, 15
Spityura, brother of Yima (Jam-
shid), i, 130
Spring, a, 143
of Sav, q.v., 163
Srévbar, mythical serpent, i, 172

Stages, the Seven, 156. See As-
fandiyar.

Stateira. See Barsine.

Steed, piece in chess. See Horse.

Steeds, iron, Sikandar’s, 159, vi,
115
filled with naphtha, vi, 115
Fur’s elephants and troops
routed by, vi, -116
Stone, the Black. See Black.
Strabo, Greek geographer (born
G. 63 B:C.), vi, 68, 81
Strength, handgrip as test of.
See Handgrip.
Subuktigin, father of Sultan
Mahmud, account of, i, 20
title of, i, 21
referred to by, i, 100, 114
Sudaba, daughter of the king of

Hamavaran and wife of

Kai Kats, 143-146, ii, 3,
79, 188, 189, 200, seg. 225,
249, 257, 335, 339
description of, ii, 86
marries Kai Kaus, ii, 88
imprisoned with Kai Kats
by her fathe1, 1, 91
released by Rustam, li, 97
temptation of Siyawush by,
il, 200 seq.
slain by Rustam, ii, 340
referred to, v, 174
Sufarai (Sarkhan, Sukhra,
Seoses ?), 166, vii, 170
and note, 171, 173 seq.;
viii, 72, 75, 168, 285
appointed minister to the
regent Balash, vii, 164

 

| Sughdiana, vi, 72.

377

Sufarai, glorification of, in
franian tradition, vii, 170

account of, vii, 173, 184,
185

resolves to avenge Piruz,
vii, 173

writes to Baldsh, vii, 173

marches on Marv, vii, 174

correspondence of, with
Khushnawaz, vii, 174

defeats Khushnawaz, vii,
177

gives the spoil to the troops,
vii, 177

KKhushnawaz sues for peace
to, vil, 178

consults his troops, vii,

178

resolves to make peace, vii,
179

replies to Khushnawaz, vii,
179

returns to [fran in triumph,
vil, 180

welcomed by Balash and
the chiefs, vii, 181
greatness of, vii, 181, I90
dethrones Balash and makes
Kubad Shah, vii, 182
proverb concerning, vii, 185
identical with Rizmihr, vii,
185
fall of, vii, 190 seq.
Kubad’s letter to, vii, 193
arrest of, vil, 193
property of, confiscated, vii,
104
conveyed to Shah Kubad,
vii, 194
executed, vii, 195
son of, (Rizmihr), vii, 196
Sufis, vi, 59 and note
Sughd (Sughdiana, Samarkand),
district and city in Turk-
istan between the Oxus
and Jaxartes, i, 19; ii,
230, 232, 237, 241, 249,
358 ; ili, 244; 1v, 65, 188,
189, 2555 Vi, 3317 337.
358, 359
See Sughd.
378

Suhrab, son of Rustam and
Tahmina daughter of the
king of Samangan, 144,
Li AM Seale 2001 wavReOd
vi, 325

Story of, 744 ii, 118 seq.
Note on, 1, 118
purely episodic, ii, 118
Sir John Malcolm’s ver-

sion of, li, 118
Matthew Arnold’s version
Of) 11) ans

Prelude to, li, 119

lament of, for the loss of
Gurdafrid, ii, 119, note

questions his mother as to
his father, ii, 126

chargei of, sired by Rakhsh,
li, 128

Afrasiyab’s plot against, ii,
129
gifts to, 11, 130

invades fran, ii, 130

takes Hajir prisoner, li, 131

beguiled by Gurdafrid, ii,133

described by Gazhdaham,
li, 136

sees from White Castle the
franian host advancing,
ii, 148

seen while feasting by Rus-
tam, li, 150

hears of the death of Zhanda
Razm, ii, 151

misled by Hajir, i, 152 seq.

ovetthrows the camp-en
closure of Kaus, ii, 160

challenged by Rustam, ij,

161

Rustam described by, ii,
154, 169
advances of, to Rustam,
li, 169

spares Rustam’s life, ii, 170

again encounters Rustam, 11,
m2

makes himself known to
Rustam, ii, 173

last requests of, to Rustam,
li, 175
mourning for, ii, 182 seq.

GENERAL INDEX

| Sikhra. See Sufarai.
| Sukhta, treasure, viii, 406 and
note
Sultan. See Mahmud.

| Sumal, vill, 195
| Sun, on the Nature of the, 739,

i, 105
one of the seven planets, i,
72
in astiology, i, 188, 310
and note

total eclipse of, vii, 159
Sunday, vill, 378, 380
Sunnites, orthodox Muhamma-
dans, i, 13
oligin of, i, 13
Sur, city near Ispahan, 176, iv,
[A6, USO 5s. 1k. 745 OO moss
O7, 100, 16, .L0S

Sura. See Shurab.

| Surkha, son of Afrasiyab, 146,

|
|

|
|
|
|

PO2is ala 4'4s SECr.
taken prisoner by Fara-
matrz, li, 345
death of, ii, 347
Sursan (Zib-i-Khusrau, Rimiya
q.v.) city built by Nushir-
wal, TOs) vil. 307 32re
328 -
Surush, angel, the messenger of
Wrmurzdien59) 727 ery

E75; L825" MU, «2885 280%
3045) AOS; lls 2.7578: menue
139, 203, 265, 285, 307;
V;) 70; “253 7>. Vi; akee
note, 372; vii, 38; vill,
173

warns Gaitimart against the
Black Div, i, 119

bids Gaiimart avenge Siya-
mak, i, 120

visits and instructs Fa1idin,
i, 159

counsels Fariduin about Zah-
hak, 1, 169

appears to Gudarz in a
dream, ii, 363

referred to, iv, 273

informs Kai Khusrau that,
his prayer is granted, iv,
281
 

GENERAL INDEX 379

Surtish, angel, bids Kai Khusrau
appoint Luhrasp as his
successor, 1v, 281

may be assumed to have
accompanied Kai Ihus-
rau on his pilgrimage, iv,
139, 303, 308
saves Khusrau Parwiz from
Bahram Chubina, viii,
189, 299
Surtsh, day, i, 88; vi, 411
Surtish, astrologer, vi, 372
takes Bahram Gur’s horo-
scope, vi, 376

Susanak, a miller’s daughter,

vii, 32 and note
taken to wife by Bahram
Gur, vii, 33

Susiana (Khuzistan q.v.), vi, 295,
S00.) ivil, 134

Sviatoi, island lying off western
shore of the Caspian, i, 58
note

Swat, river in Northern India,
vi, 65

Swyamvara, Indian form of
matriage, iv, 316

Syavarshana (Siyawush - q.v.),
il) LOOE lve D377

Syria (Sham), country, li, 80;
vi, 30; viii, 193

raided by Persians, viii, 41

Syriac, version of the Pseudo-
Callisthenes, vi, 14, 16, 18,
30, 31 seq., 61, 63, 65, 66,
OS, Fie 2x 74, 170) Seq.

Chiistian Legend of Alex-
ander, vi, 14, 15, 74, 78, 84
quoted, vi, 15

metrical version of, vi
15, 78, 84
Syrian, ix, 66

©

TaBAK, franian chief, 167, vi, 202,
225
suspected by Ardshi: Papa-
kan, vi, 225

| Tabak, justifies himself, vi 226
Ardshir Papakan and, de-
feat Bahman, vi, 226
buries Ardawan, vi, 229
advises Ardshir Papakan to
marry the daughter of
Ardawan, vi, 229
| Tabaii, Arabic historian (A.D.
838-923), lil, 108; vi, 14
note, 16, 19, 30, 198, 200,
291 note, 310, 313, 315,
| 320, 326+ vil, 4 seg:, 156;
159, 160, 170, I7I, 185
186, 217; Vili, 73, 75 se€q.,
TSO stk 4en 50). On, 04)
69
account of death of Rustam
by, v, 261
etymology of Darab, v,
297 nole
Sdsanians, vi, 14 note
Alexander’s battles with
Darius, vi, 30
Yajuj and Majuj, vi, 78
rise of Sasanian dynasty,

| vi, 198

Ardshir Papakan, vi, 198,
203

genealogies of Papak, vi,

200

 

Worm, vi, 205, 206
Haftwad, vi, 205, 206
length of Ardshir Papa-
kan’s reign, vi, 254
Ardawan’s daughte1, vi,
255
Shapur, son of Ardshir
Papakan, vi, 255, 257
death of Shapur, son of
Shaptr, vi, 365
Bahram, son of Shapur,
vi, 368
Yazdagird, son of Shapur,
vi, 371 seq.
| Kubad and Nushirwan’s
reform of taxation, vii,
183 nole, 215
Turks, vil, 317
Persian, vii, 5; vill, 42, 73
SEG La ySld. set NA, 5) 495
7° =
380

Tabari, Persian, story from, con-
cerning Kubad, vii, 183
note

Arabic, viii, 42, 73, 187, 190
195; 1X, 4, 5, 7, 43, 50

Tabaristan (Mazandaran, g.v.),

i, 39, 40; 1x, 74
Firdausi’s stay in, i, 39
chief of, i, 39, 40

patron of Firdausi, i, 39

Table of Contents, General, ix,139

Tables, Genealogical. See Gene-
alogical.

Tacitus, Roman historian (A.D.
55-120), ui, 10 and note,
D5p Viess

Tahmasp, father of Zav, i, go,
3004 370 Gplls lass LVS

Tahmina, daughter of the king of
Samangan and mother of
Suhrab, 144; ii, 4, 118

precautions of, for her son’s

safety, ii, 127, 140, 149
mourning of, for Suhrab, ii,

184 seq.
death of, ii, 186

Tahmuras, Shah, 140, i, 42, 90,
Ol, 2A MeO. Wily 2O3)-
LVe, 133) eVvilN O) andiio0ze:
2733 villi, 277, 332, 376;
ix, 25

Reign of, 740, 1, 125 seq.

Note on, 1, 125
Binder of the Div (Ahri-

man)) i, 125, 127.214
Ahrimanand, legend of, 1,125
culture hero, i, 125, 126
divs rebel against, i, 127
conquers and enslaves the

divs L277,

taught writing by the
divs) ter27,

dies, i, 128

Firdausi’s reflections on, i,
128

horn of, iii, 335
Tainush (Cha1ogos, Kerator,
Kanir), son of Kaidafa,
159; Wi, 66, 67, 134 seq.
Kaidafa warns Sikandar
against, vi, 133

GENERAL INDEX

| Tainush, Fur’s son in law, vi,
133
| insults Sikandar, vi, 134
Kaidafa chides, vi, 135
Kaidafa and Sikandar con-
| sult about, vi, 135
| makes a@ covenant with
Sikandar, vi, 136
accompanies Sikandar on
his return, vi, I41
Sikandar discovers himself
tO Vii A2
asks grace of Sikandar, vi,
142
pardoned by Sikandar, vi,
142
entertained at a banquet,
presented with gifts, and
dismissed, by Sikandar,
| vi, 143
| Tainish (Theodosius), 163, vi,
372, 389, 404
goes to Yazdagird as amLas-
sador, vi, 389
asked by Bahram Gur to
intercede with Yazdagird
for him, vi, 389
obtains Bahram Gut’s re-
lease, vi, 390, 404
Tair (Daizan, qg.v.), Arab chief,
| TO2 Vie 3) 322, 924.5080

 

seq.
| Taisaftin (Ctesiphon, q.v.), 168,
| 174; vi, 397; vii, 188,
| 194, 361, 363 ; viii, 53, 90,
| 10g note, 118, 173, 175,
TGO; 182, 220, 241 >) 10}
10, 90
Ardshir Papakan goes to,
vi, 245
Shaptr’s bridge at, vi, 321,
329

sacked by Tair, vi, 330
Shapur sends spies to, vi, 346
Cesar defeated and taken
prisoner by Shapur at, vi,
347 wae
Nushirwan returns to, vill,

33
Bahram Chtbina marches
from province of, viii, 106
GENERAL

Taisafin, Khusrau Parwiz im-
prisoned at viii, 421 ; ix,9
Barbad visits Khusrau Par-
wiz at, ix, 29
Taj, viii, 71
Takdis, Throne of, 174, viii, 391
account of, viii, 391
added to by Jamasp, viii,
392
Takht (or Tak)-i-Bustan, place
some four miles north-
east of Kirmanshah in the
Persian province of Arde-
lan and famous for its

Sasanian bas-reliefs, vi,
257 5 Vill; rO2
inscription at, vi, 257
Takht-i-Khusrau. See Mada’in.
Takht-i-Sulaiman (Sbiz, 4q.v.),
vili, 189
Talhand, Indian prince, 169,

vli, 394, 390 seq.

Story of Gav and, 169, vii,
394, seq.

mother of. See Gav.

birth of, vil, 396

tutor of, vii, 397, 398, 401,
402, 408, 410, 414

rivalry between Gav and,
vil, 397 seq.

war between Gav and, vii,
404 Seq.

rejects Gav’s offe1 of accom-
modation, vii, 406, 409

death of, foretold, vii, 408,
413, 418

defeated by Gav, vii, 412

accepts Gav’s proposal for a
decisive battle, vii, 415

defeat and death of, vii,
416

Talikan, city and_ stronghold

east of Marv, ii, 228; iv,
65, 255

ceded by Piruz to the Haita-
lians, vil, 156, 160

importance of, vii, 156

Taliman, franian hero, i, 211, 217

252

meets Kai Khusrau in Sughd
vl, 255

| Taurus, constellation, iii,

 

INDEX

Talisman, Cesar’s, 172
described, viii, 271, 275
deceives Persian envoys,

viii, 272
mastered by Kharrad, viii,
274
Tamarisk, plant, i, 4;
243, 246, 247, 256
branch of, fatal to Asfandi-
yar, v, 239 and note

Tammisha (Kus), town in Eastern

Mazandaran, formerly a
seat of Faridiuin’s, between
Sariyah and Astarabad, i,
U77,. 200; 230

Tamuz, vili, 77 note

Tanais, river, iv, 315 and note

Tarak, river (the Atrak, the

boundary between Gur-
gan and Dahistan, or the
Turk flowing into the
Jaxartes west of Tash-
kand ?), vii, 164, 165, 359
Taraz, city now in ruins, north-
east of Tashkand near the
present town of Aulieh-
Ataei. 257, 2001. L570:
vi, 268; vili, 370; ix, 41
Cypress of=Rudaba, i, 269
dls of, 10123) 206; 211;
248; iv, 218; vill, 370
Tartary, iv, 156

381

Vv, 240,

168 ;
LV Lie VI, TST) > Val, 202
Tausar, high piiest under Ard-
shir Papakan, i, 62
letter of, i, 63

Tawaba, [franian hero, iii, 2

Tawurg, Turanian hero, iv, 188
sent on an expedition by
Afrasiyab, iv, 188
defeated by Rustam, iv, 193
Taxation, 167, vii, 224
Tirdausi’s exemption from,
1; 955 90; 1x). 12r
reform of, by Kubad, vii, 183
note, 215, 225
Nushirwan, vii, 215, 225
seq.
Taxila, Indian city, vi, 63
situation of, vi; 62
382

Tazhav, an [rdnian deserter to,
and son-in-law of, Afrasi-
yab, 148; iii, 27, 28
sends Kabuda to spy out the
franian host, iii, 73
paileys with Giv, ili, 75
defeated, ili, 77
flees with Ispanwi, li, 77
pursued by Bizhan, iii, 77
escapes to Afrasiyab, ili, 78
attacks Bahram, ili, 100
taken prisoner by Giv, iii,
102
Temperaments, the four, vii, 381
symbolised in the game of
nard, vii, 381
Tennyson, quoted, v, 281
Thartha1, river in northern
Mesopotamia, vi, 322
Theodore, brother of Heraclius,

vili, 194

Theodosiopolis, city in Armenia,
vii, 187

Theodosius II. (Tainush, q.v.),
Eastern Roman Em-
peror (A.D. 401-450), vi,
3725 Valse

Theodosius (Niyatus, g.v.), viii,
189

Theophanes, Greek Chronicler,

account of last days of
Khusrau Parwiz by, ix, 6
Thermodon, river on the south-
ern shores of the Euxine,
vi, 72
Thornbrake town, the world, i,
310
Thraétaona, i, 171 seg.; u, 81
Thrita a, tga sega
Tiber, river, v, 294
Tiberius II., Eastern Roman
Emperoi, vii, 212; vili, 42
Tigris (Arwand), river, vi, 294
B26- Willy £03, £OAs ik,
67
small, the, vi, 199 and note
lower, vi, 291 note
bridge over, vi, 321
Tihran, Citys 1,929) s5 11 Ola ay,
14, 18
edition of Shahnama, i, 76

GENERAL INDEX

Tir, genius, iii, 287, 328
month and day, i, 88, viii,

94

Tiri, eunuch of Guzihbr, vi, 198 .

Tirmid, city and fortress north
of the Oxus (Jihtn) where
the route from Balkh to
Samarkand crosses that
iver, li, 229, 258; iv, 65;
vu, 156, 157, 331

Tirtdih, village in the neighbour-
hood of Istakhr (Perse-
polis), and the birth-place
of Ardshir Papakan, vi,198

Tishtar, Sirius, i, 235

Tobit, Book of, iii, 272

Toll-house and ford of Zark, ix,
Ioo and ole, 116

| Tollman, Giv and the, 146; ii,

390
Gushtasp and the, iv, 324,
332 and note, 334 seq., 344
S€q-, 351
Trade-routes, ancient, i, II, 57
Traitana, i, 7, 8, 171 seq:
Trajan, Roman Emperor (A.D.
98-117), vi, 322
siege of Hatra by, vi, 322
Translation, the principles adop-
ted in the present, i, 76 seq.
Translators of the Shahnama,
list of previous, i, 87
Treasute, of Jamshid, 164, vii, 36
Kai Khisrau, 260, iv, 295;
vi, 178
Sikandar, vi, 110 and note
Khusrau Parwiz, vill, 406
Tree, the Speaking, 160, vi, 79
described, vi, 167 seq.
Sikandar visits, v1, 167,:-seq.
warns Sikandar of his death,
vi, 168, 169
Triad of evil, Zoroastrian, i, 59
and note
Tribal, or Part, Kings, the, 160,
vi, 180, 203, 204, 225, 252,
253
origin of, vi, 179, 181, 210
character of their rule vi,
197, 198
number of, vi, 198
GENERAL INDEX

Tribal, or Part Kings, Ardawan,
the chief of, vi, 201
Firdausi on, vi, 210
Tribute, Ruim’s to fran, vi, 24;
Vii, 214, 215, 248, 262, 333,
338, 362; vili, 52, 53
frit, 1, 7,9, 17E seq.
Tshatrang-Namak, Pahlavi text,
vii, 380, 381
Tughral, a species of falcon,, vii,
49
described, vii, 48 :
Bahram Gur’s, vii, 48 seg.
Tukhar, Fartid’s counsellor, 147,
iii, 43 seq.
tells Farid the blazons of
the [ranian chiefs, iii, 44
counsels Farud, ili, 47, 52 seq.
Tukhar, king of Dahistan, iv, 148
commands with Fariburz
the troops from Khawar,
iv, 148
slays a scout from Makran,
lv, 242
Tukhar, franian chief, viii, 228
takes letter to Cesar, vili,
263
Tukhar, franian general, con-
spires against Khusrau
Parwiz, vili, 414
releases Shirwi, viii, 415
refuses to help Piriz against
Guraz, ix, 48
Tukhara, [ranian warrior, viii,
296
son of, viii, 314
Tumaspa (Tahmasp, q.v.), i, 369
Tur, second son of Faridin and
ivler of Turan, r4o, r4r,
i, 42, 90 Se€q., 335, 337,
342, 344, 362 ; li, 8,17, 19,
99, 237, 262, 297, 302, 303,
318, 327, 363, 390; iii,
7, 39 37, 115, 197, 245,
246 ; iv, II, 34, 66, 69, 70,
78, 166, 167, 188, 201, 203,
206, 269, 272, 290; V, 42,
206, 261, 254 * Wiy_353°
vii, 73 ; viii, 266, 300, 376
note, 378; ix, 103
racial significance of, i, 54

383

Tur, etymology of, i, 174
naming of, i, 187
horoscope of, i, 188
made ruler over the Turk-

mans and Chin, i, 189
plots with Salm, i, 190
Salm and, demand the abdi-

cation of [raj, i, 191

fraj visits, i, 198

reception of [raj by, 1,

198, seq.

slay fraj, i, 201

send [raj’s head to Fari-

dun, i, 202

hear of Minuchihr, i, 208

send %’an embassy to Fari-

dun, i, 208

receive Faridtn’s reply,

i, 2132 seq.

prepare for war, 1. 215
parley of, with Kubad, 1, 217
Salm and, worsted by Minu-

chihr, i, 220

plan a night-surprise, i,

220

worsted, i, 221
slain by Minuchihr, i, 221
head of, sent to Faridun, i,

222
Fire-temple at Bukhara

built by, iv, 255
daughter of, iv, 304
=Turan; iv, 51, 164
chief of=Human, iv, 51
prince of =Shida, iv, 164

Turan (Turkistan), the legendary

patrimony of Tur, g.v. and
a general name for the
non-franian regions north
of the Oxus (Jihun), 142,
146, 148, 152, 153, 165-
FOS 1; 1695220) 45%. 377,
ii, 9, 18,'25, 79, 82; 101,
112 and passim ; iii, 8, 11,
15, 25, 29 and passim ;
iv, 10, 15, 17, 19, 20, and
passim ; v, 12, 20 seq., 25,
32, 41, 43, 45, 53, 61, and
passim ; vi, 43, 182, 398;
vii, 43, 92, 136, 156, 178;
Vili, 118, 123, 130, 242,
384 GENERAL INDEX
, Turk, Turks=Kulun, viii, 345

Turan—cont.
329, 331, 349, ee 376,
405, 407; 1x, II, 89, 99
monarch of Chin ae Afra-
siyab, li, 99
host of, ii, I10
lord of =Mahmaud, iv, 142
Turanians (Turkmans), 143, 148,
TAG), ESL USS D5 5s HOO
rp (hy 1Hoyy Gy Gibh, eit, (ot, PXOISE
ile 30) TEs. 320; 98220) Lvs
7) Os SL 2O 223 227s
G3 20) LLO) Vill QO vit.
123, 320
historical relations of, with
the Iranians, i, 16
Turks Durks) O72 Orville gs
TO3, 120; S59 L360" uss
Sez, L42;) LOA, 169), 170,
189, 316, 320, 349, 352;
ix: 70, 96 seq., 005s) Lr4,
EL7e ZO
confused with the Haita-
lians, vil, 4
historical appearance of, vii,
317
Tabari on, vii, 317
defeat the Haitalians, vii,
332
described, vii, 332
War of, with Persians, viii,
72
prophesied, viii, 98
=—Sawa, vill, 98
defeated, vili, 126
find Sawa’s corpse, vili, 127
sorcerer, sends ill dream to
Bahram Chubina, viii,
214) L26
put to death, viii, 129
heads of chiefs of, sent to
Hurmuzd, vill, 130
retreat to Turan, viii, 131
three, the, viii, 187, 204
one of, attacks Khusrau
Parwiz, vili, 220
reproved by Bahram
Chubina, vili, 221
lead night-attack on Khus-
tau Parwiz, viii, 22
=Makatura, vill, 319

|

defeated by Yalan-sina, viii,

353
Turkhan, Turanian hero, v, 151

sent with troops to recon-
noitre outside the Brazen
Hold, v, 151

| Turkish, ix, 87
| Turkistan (Turan), 147, ries)

Lid: LOO,. 22015) ive 2SSneve
553 vi, 179, 278, 280, 397 ;
vil, 84, 92, 118, 334, 365;
Vill, 324, 336, 363, 370,
SYP G SOT

Turkman, Turkmans (Turan-

ians), 148, 155, i, 20, 189,
263; 343; 352, 35751
12, 14, 15,92, woovand
passim ; iil, 30, 63, 81, 93,
and passim; iv, 10, 13,
5, 10).20,, 22) 20 yands
passim ; V, 22, 25, 36, 39,
40, 44, 47, 51, 52, 61, 72,
go seg., 98 seg., 104 seq.,
LOS EO, Ls) ELA rT:

135, 152, 157, 158, 17%,
173, 206, 254; vu, 48, 88,
92, 97, 177, 179, 239, 344,
SO4ie Will, 37.775) eae Gs

94

slave-boy of Zal meets the
damsels of Rudaba, 1, 263
seq.

make peace with Zav, i, 371

army of, surrenders to As-
fandiyar, v, 72, 113

monarch of=Arjasp, v, 74

led by Kuhram, storm
Balkh, burn the Fire-
temple, and slay Zar-
duhsht and the priests, v,
92, 93

take Gushtasp’s daughters
captive, v, 93

kingdom of, offered by
Asfandiyar to Gurgsar in
return for faithful service,
v, 120

ordered by Arjasp to march
out from the Brazen Hold
in force to.attack the in-
GENERAL

Turkman, Turkmans—cont.

vaders under Bishiutan, v,
152

hear the cries of the [ran-
ian watch in the Brazen
Hold, v, 155

refused quarter by Asfandi-
yar, v, 158

language, vi, 147

defeated by Bahram Gur,
vil, 90, 9I

sue for peace, vii, 91

war of Piriz with, vii, 164
seq.

inroads of, through the
Caucasus, vii, 238

make submission to Niushir-
wan, vii, 360

— Turks vi, 87,
217

king=Afrasiyab, ix, 25

89, 94,

Tus, son of Naudar, [ranian hero,

146-149, 154, 176; i, 90
353, 379; U, 33, 35, 38,
58, 62, 70, 73, 85, 90, 91,
127, 138; i42,, 040,177,
188; 193, 197, 199, 226,
257, 316, 319, 335, 338,
349, 349, 353 Séeq., 371,
383, 3045 ll, £1,. 28, 19:
24, 25, 37 Seq., 45 seq., 60,
62, 64, 66 seq., 76, 78, 80,
82 seqg., 108, III seq., 132
séq., 136 seq., 145, 149
seq., 154, 155, 159, 161,
163, 166, 167, 169, 170,
E72 Ata OH eS + OLS
LO3, ogy e200, 201, 213
SG.5) 225,225; .230,. 232,
ZAAVS Aah GO. 240: 245,
253, 254, 255, 257, 259,
268, 273, 277, 289, 294,
307, 322, 327, 329; iv, 13,
15, 62, 79, 91, 157, 180,
IOI, 224,226; 227; 242,
292, 290, 3068 seq.; v,
57,) DLO,© 207, .206.-) “vii:
168

Gustaham and, sent by Nau-
dar to conduct the | rciae
women to Alburz, i, 351

VOL. Ix.

INDEX
Tus,

385

Gustaham and, hear of
Naudar’s death, i, 364
passed over in the succession
i, 369, 370

character of, i, 369

appointed captain of the
host, ii, 78

taken prisoner in Hama-
varan, li, go

released by Rustam, ii, 97

goes in search of Kai Kaus,
li, 104

engaged in the Fight of the
Seven Warriors, ii, 107
seq.

commanded by Kai Kats to
hang Rustam and Giv,
li, 143

encampment of, described,
TSS

summons Rustam to fight
Suhrab and helps to
saddle Rakhsh, ii, 160

quarrels with Giv over the
future mother of Siya-
wush, ii, 194

supersedes Siyawush, ii, 246
seq.

leads the host home, li, 258

intercedes for Surkha, ii,

347
worsted in fight by Afrasi-
yab, ii, 353

appointed ruler of Chach, ii,
358

returns to fran, ii, 362

dispute of, with Gudarz over
Kai Khusrau, li, 400 seq.

advocates the claims of Fari-
burz, li, 401

asks pardon of IKhusrau, ii,
410

hostility of, to Farud, ii, 13,
51, 62

marches on Kalat, iii, 40

sends chiefs to attack Farid,
iii, 47 seq.

Bahram’s
with, iii, 51

horse of, slain by Farid, iii,
56

remonstrance

BB
386 GENERAL INDEX

Tus, resolves to attack Kalat, iii, | Tus, posted on Khusrau’s right,

62

remorse of, for the death of
Farid, iii, 67

builds a charnel for Farid,
Rivniz, and Zarasp, iii,
68

marches from Kalat, ii, 68

defeats Tazhav, lii, 77

occupies Giravgard, iii, 78

defeated by the Turkmans,
ili, 82

deprived of his command,
iii, 83

Kai Khusrau’s wrath with,
IM, 4) Lek 2

superseded, ili, 86

returns to Kai Khusrau, ili,
86

disgraced, iii, 86

imprisoned, iii, 87

pardoned, iii, 114

challenges Piran to battle,
ii, 117

joins battle with Piran, iii,
IS, 126

parleys with Human, iii, 121

piays to be delivered from
the snowstorm, ili, 128

retreats to Mount Hama-
wan, ili, 132

makes a night-attack upon
Piran, iii, 139

harangues the host, ili, 141

hears of the approach of suc-
cours, lll, 159

takes counsel with the host,
ili, 167

arrays the host, iii, 169

chiefs and, take counsel with
Rustam, ili, 172

Rustam’s wrath with, iii,
23

collects the spoil, ili, 235

worsted by Puladwand, iii,

leads a host to Kharazm, iv,
61

son of =Zarasp, iv, 135
made overseer of the host,

Iv, 149

iv, 146

takes part in the siege of
Gang-bihisht, iv, 199

oidered to prepare for a
night-attack from Afra-
siyab, iv, 224

Kai Khusrau remonstrated
with by, and other nobles,
for refusing audience, iv,
275

Gudarz, and other nobles
take counsel, iv, 277

audience of, with Kai Khus-
rau, lv, 283 seq.

holds with other chiefs, at
the bidding of Kai Khus-
Tau, an assembly on the
plain, iv, 291 seq.

Kai Khusrau’s gifts to, iv,
295, 300

asks for further recognition
from Kai Khusrau, iv,
299

tetains the charge of Kawa’s
flag and receives Khur-
asan, iv, 300

sets out with Kai Khusrau
on his pilgrimage, iv,
306

refuses to turn back when
bidden by Kai Khusrau,
iv, 307

Kai Khusrau farewells and
wains, and his comrades,
iv, 308
disappears and is sought

- in vain by, and his

comrades, iv, 308
end of, iv, 309

Tus, city, now in ruins, north of

Mashad in Khurasan, 1,

395 Vi 28; Vi, 3935 OS,
99, 95 ;

birthplace of Firdausi, i, 38,
41, 45

governor of, i, 39

plince of, i, 100, 114

legendary origin of, iii, 14

legend conceining Firdausi’s
burial at, ill, 191
GENERAL

‘lus, city, treasure of Kai Kaus
called ‘‘ The Bride ”’ stored
at, iv, 295
Sam and the dragon of, v,
202
local legend of, vi, 372, 391
seq.
governor of, ix, 92
Tuwurg, Turanian hero, ii, 253
Tuwurg, brother of Khan, 173,
Vili, 364
reports flight of Gurdya, viii,
35% an
sent in pursuit, viii, 351
parleys with Gurdya, viii,
352 .
Twelve Rukhs_ (Champions),
Battle of the. See Rukhs.
Signs (Zodiac), vii, 408
Tyre, city, vi, 30
siege of, vi, 30

U

Ulad, a div, 143, ii, 28, 59, 61;
iv, 296 note; v, 204 note
Rustam and, ii, 52 seq.
made king of Mazandaran,
AT. 70
’Umar, Khalifa (A.D. 634-643),
i, I1 seg., 67; ix, 66 seq.,
72, (FO. 12k
founds Basra, ix, 69
sends Hashim in pursuit of
Yazdagird, ix, 68
Yu’man to fight Yazda-
gird, ix, 68
Sa’ad to invade fran, ix,
72
"Umar Khayyam, Persian poet
and scientist (died A.D.
L123); e530
Ummayyads, Muhammadan
dynasty, i, 12, 13
Uné, daughter of Alexander the
Great in the Pseudo-Cal-
listhenes, vi, 77
Ural Mountains, iii, 192

INDEX 387

. Urmuzd, the Good Principle, i,
5, 50, 116 seq., 236, li, 82,
lil, 2755250, 317,327 5 1V;
139, 185; v, 15 seq.; Vi,
55, 362, 372, 387; vil,
228, 406 and note; viii,
Bos SutK, 24.
Unity of, symbolised in the
game of nard, vii, 381
day, i, 88; iii, 323; vi, 302
and note, 306, 375
Urmuzd, Ashkdénian (Parthian)
king, vi, 197, 210
-Urmuzd, son of Shaptr, Shah
(Hormisdas I), 161, 162,
Vi, 3, 257, 273, 280, 313,
327
discovery of, by Ardshir Pa-
pakan, vi, 257, 271
birth of, vi, 271
counselled by Ardshir Pa-
pakan, vi, 280
Shapur, vi, 299
Reign of, 162, vi, 301 seq.
Note on, vi, 301
title of, vi, 301
story about, vi, 301
| Urmuzd, son of Narsi, Shah
(Hormisdas II), 762, vi, 3,
2904, 295, 307, 315, 316,
325; Vii, 3593; Viil, 41
Reign of, vi, 318 seq.
Note on, vi, 318
sons of, vi, 318
inaugural address of, vi, 318
pregnant wife of, enthroned,
vi, 320
Urmuzd (Hormisdas), son of
Urmuzd, Persian Prince,
vi, 318, 325
referred to (?), vi, 337
| Urmuzd Ardshir (Ahwaz), city in
Khuzistan, vi, 290 and
note
| Urmuzd, franian warrior, viii, 296
| Uroscopy, vi, 101, 107, 108
Urumiah (Khanjast or Chijast),
lake in Azarbdijan, iv,
136; viii, 195
Afrasiyab escapes from Him
into, iv, 262 and note

-

 
3288

GENERAL INDEX

Ustad, franian general, vii, 251 | Wardanes, wars of, with Gotarzes,

commands Nushirwan’s
right wing, vil, 251
Ustad, franian warrior, viii, 296
Ustukila, Turanian hero, iv, 182
fights with Kai Khusrau, iv,
182
’Utbi, Al, secretary to
Mahmud, 1, 32
’Uthman, Khalifa, i, 12
Utterakuri, a legendary people,
vi, 74
Uzava (Zav), Shah, i, 369

Sultan

V
VALE of heroes, vii, 6
Valerian (Bazanush), Roman
Emperor (A.D. 253-260),
vi, 323 seq.

defeat and capture of, by
Shaptr son of Ardshir, vi,
294, 295
memorials of, vi, 295
confused with Odenathus,

Julian, and Jovian, vi,
324 Seq.

death of, in captivity, vi,
326

Valkash (Vologeses I), Parthian
(Ashkanian) king, i, 62, 63

Vandaremaini (Andariman),
brother of Arjasp, v, 13

Varahran I (Bahram son of
Urmuzd), Sasanian king,
vi, 307

Varahran II (Bahram son of
Bahram), Sasanian king,
vi, 310

Varahran III (Bahram Bahrami-
yan), Sasanian king, vi,
313, 368

Varahran IV (Bahram son of
Shapur), Sasanian king,
vi, 313, 368

Varahran V (Bahram _ Gur),
Sasanian king, vii, 3

Vardanes (Bahram), Parthian
(Ashkanian) king, iil, 9
seq., 109

 

Ae TOs eetaT
assassination of, ili, 10, II
character of, ili, 15
Varengana, the raven, i, 235, 236
Vedas} 1,129; 14.4) 171,'2346337,
TRO, wel 215 ee
Vega, star, vii, 245
Vendidad, Nask, vii, 188
reference to Mazdak in, vii,
188
Venus, planet, i, 72, 100, 194,
276, 303, 322, 332, 339; Uy,
115; 2755 34507 lla
159, 254, 318, 332; Vv,
159 ; vi, 98, 102, 171, 190,
ZUA 22 AGe 3 32Ne vl Soe
151, 2633 vill, 152, 359;
394, 395; 1x, 26, 73
Verethraghna, the raven, ii, 25

Victory of Victories, The, ix, 69 .

Vidrafsh (Bidirafsh), v, 24, 26
Village-chief, 154

Vineyards, taxes on, vii, 215, 225
Virgo, constellation, ili, 24; viii,

359; 1x, 71

Vishtasp (Vistaspa, Gushtasp,
q.U.), V, 24

Vistaspa (Vishtasp, Gushtasp,

Gi0=) up ANeeS Olay emia

Vistasp-sast, v, II

Vitrified fortifications, vi, 79, 165

Vivanghat, i, 129

Vohtiman. See Vohu Manau.

Vohu Manau (Vohtiman, Bah-
man), ameshaspenta, iii,
Parfit nige a Op ai7/

Volga, river of European Russia,
falling into the Caspian,
iv, LO

Vologeses I (Valkash), Parthian
(Ashkanian) king (A.D. 51
-77) 1, 62, 63

Vologeses IJ, Parthian (Ashka-
nian king), i, 19

Vologeses (Balash), king of Kir-
man, temp. Ardshir Papa-
kan, vi, 205

Vologeses (Balash), Shah, vii, 170

Vonones I, Parthian (Ashkanian)
king (A.D. 8-12)

he
oe Seen ale
GENERAL INDEX

Vouru-Kasha, sea, iv, 137

Vritra, demon, ii, 25

' Indra and, vi, 203

Vullers-Landauer edition of the
Shahnama, i, 77; vi, 60

W

Wanur, region, iii, 177, 228, 235
Wakkas, father of Sa’ad g.v.,
I76; ix, 72, 78, 82, 90
Walid, Khalifa, vi, 325
Walnuts, taxes on, vii, 225
War of the Religion, v, 19, 26, 2
two campaigns of, v, 29
Warazad, king of Sipanjab, 146,
li, 341 seq., 346
Warigh (Callinicus, Kaliniytis,
q.v., Nicephorium, Rakka)
Gliy, Villy. 168, 253) 257,
280
Khusrau Parwiz takes up his
abode at, viii, 257
Warriors, the Seven, Story of the
Fight of, 2743, ii, 25, 82,
107 seq.
Warstead = Bidad, iii, 245
Wash, city, viii, 24 and note
Water, scarcity of, i, 3
—courses, underground, i, 3
—horse, 163, vi, 373, 392
referred to, vi, 373
legend of Yazdagird and
the, vi, 392
—stealing demons, i, 7, 338
of Life, 160, v, 30; vi, 159,
160
Wazir (minister), piece in chess,
vii, 385, 423
position of, vii, 388, 422
move of, vii,
West, Dr. E. W., referred to, v,
IL
West, the, Salm’s portion of the
world, i, 189
gateway of, viii, 369 and
note
Western sea, the, 160, vi, 158
Whale, mistaken for an island,
vi, 71, 147

29

389

adventure
with a, vi, 71, 147
Wheeler, James Talboys, quoted,
vi, 81
Whip, Bahram Gur’s, vii, 47, 54,
63, 64
object of reverence, vii, 47,

Whale,  Sikandar’s

54, 93
White Castle (Mount Sipand,
q.v.), stronghold north-
west of Nishapur, r44, i,
3003) Ne DIS 1ST 13S
Malcolm’s identification
and description of, i,
236); ‘v,»30
besieged by Barman, 1,
354
evacuated by Gazhdaham
Wi sy
Div, 143. See Div.
Elephant, r4z. See Elephant.
Huns (Haitalians, g.v.), i, 20
| Will, of Alexander the Great, vi,
81
provisions of, vi, 81, 181
Kubad, son of Pirtz, vii, 210
| Wine-drinking, forbidden by
Bahram Gur, vii, 2
again permitted, vii, 25
Firdausi’s love of. See Fir-
dausi.
Turanian hero, uncle of
Afrasiyab, 142, i, 92, 337,
342, 353, 361, 362 ; ii, 112
354; 1, 79, 102, 105, 121,
LOQi7,)202,7200)% NV,4425 30)
50, 54, 55, 74, 84, 95, 99,
103, 113, 115, 122
pursues Karan, i, 355
finds Barman dead, i, 356
defeated by Karan, i, 357
returns to Afrasiyab, 1, 357
sayings of, iv, 32
Wisagird, city in Turan, 757, iv,
19, 20, 65; vil, 157, 331.
Wisdom, praise of, vii, 103
Firdausi’s, 139
referred to, vii, 278
—literature, Persian, vii, 278
seq., Vill, 3
Mohl on, vii, 280

Wisa,
390

Wisdom, literature, Néldeke on,
vii, 281
apportionment of, vill, 202
Witch, 743, 156. See Sorceress.
Wizard-land, vii, 120 and note
Wolf, 154, 156, 165, vii, 121 seq.

and note

slain by Bahram Gur, vii,
123

of Faskin. See Faskun.

Women, City of, 760 See Harim.
Wonders, 160, iv, 245
the Four, of Kaid, 759. See
Kaid.
World, on the making of the, 739
Worm, the, Z6Z, vi, 195, 206, 238
seq.
Story of, 16I; vi, 196, 203
seq., 232 seq.
Mohl, Noldeke, and Dar-
mesteter on, Vi, 203 seq.
cult of, vi, 235
Ardshir Papakan’s_ strata-
gem against, vi, 242
servants of, vi, 242 seq.
Writing, art of, taught by the
divs to Tahmuras, i, 127

xX

XERXES, Persian king (B.C. 485-
465), v, 282
Asfandiyar and, v, 282
effigy of, falls, vi, 30

4

YAjyty and MAjyty (Gog and
Magog, q.v.), 160, vi, 79,
163 seq., 211 note
legend of, in the Kuran, vi,
78
Tabari on, vi, 78
described, vi, 163
Ya’kub bin Lais, Persian chieftain
and founder of the Saffari
dynasty, i, 67, 68
Ya’kubi, Arabic historian (died
A.D. 891)

| Yaman

GENERAL INDEX

Yalan-sina (Mardanshah), bro-
ther of Bahram Chiubina,
Vili, 74, 102, 122, 135, 138,
157, 163, 169, 204, 288,
291, 296 seg., 303, 316,
356, 357; ix, 6
goes hunting with Bahram
Chubina, viii, 156
pursues and trings back
archscribe vill, 159
speech of, viii, 165, 170
worsted by Khusrau Parwiz,
Vili, 229
commands the centre, viii,
289
Bahram Chibina makes, his
mandatory, vili, 342
defeats the Turks,
353
negotiates marriage between
Gurdya and Gustaham,
Vili, 357
See Yima.
(Hamavaran), south-
western Arabia, 140, 160,
162, i, 181 seqg., 266, 286;
11, 180 >. iv; LAGOS * vjn2607
Vl} 73; 120; 120, '324,933e
385, 386, 396, 401; vil,
262; viii, 98
king of=Sarv, 140, i, 178,
| 179, 182
Yaman, carnelians of, ii, 123 ; iii,
289
Canopus of, ii, 203 ; ili, 297 ;
vi, 382
onyx of, vi, 128
striped stuff of, vi, 175
monarch of, vi, 175; Viii,

vill,

Yama.

16
gives gifts to Sikandar,
vi, 175
AVI ZIT, evils i70,) Ode
390 I
Bahram Gur goes to, vi, 378,
390
conquered by Persians, viii,
24 note

 

curtains of, viii, 148, 151

| Yanus (Julian), brother of Cesar,

I62, vi, 324, 326

 

3

nt
GENERAL

Yazdagird, consults the astrolo-

Yanus, leads a host against Sha-
pur, vi, 351
defeated, vi, 352
Yasht XXII, metrical
phrase of, vii, 318
Yatkar-i-Zariran, Pahlavi text,
v, 13, 24, 27 and nofe ; vii,
380
compared with Dakiki’s
work, v, 24 seq.
resembles Karnamak, vi,
195, 196
Yazates (Izads), the, iii, 286
Yazd, city in central Persia, vi,
308
Yazdagird, son of Shaptir, Shah
(Isdigerd I), 163, 164, vi,
g5 vil, 4, 10, Log, L190;
171, 185, 359
referred to, vi, 369;

para-

Vii,

74

Reign of, 163, vi, 371 seq.
Note on, vi, 371 seq.

parentage of, uncertain, vi,
371

lover of peace like Aknaton
of Egypt, vi, 371

titles of, vi, 371, 372

Tabari on, vi, 372, 373

coins of, vi, 373

evil administration of, vi,
374, 494

makes search for a governor
for his son Bahram Gur,
vi, 376 seq.

Nu’man and Munzir visit,
vi, 377

puts Bahram Gur in Mun-
zir’s charge, vi, 378

receives from Munzir a pic-
ture of Bahram Gur shoot-
ing, vi, 385

Bahram Gur returns to, vi,
386

gives presents to, and sends
a letter by, Nu’man to
Munzir, vi, 387

disgraces Bahram Gur, vi,
389

sends Bahram Gur back to
Mun.ir, vi, 390

 

INDEX 301

gers, vi, 390

death of foretold, vi, 301

attacked by bleeding of the
nose, vi, 390

death of, vi, 373, 393
Néldeke on, vi, 373

corpse of embalmed and
taken to Pars, vi, 393

Yazdagird, son of Bahram Gur

(Isdigerd II), Shah, 166,
vi, 3; vil, 4, 152, 156, 160,
187

welcomes his father on his
return from Hind, vii,
137

appointed by Bahram Gur
to succeed him, vii, 150

Reign of, 266, vii, 153 seq.
Note on, vii, 153
a blank in Shahnama, vii,
153
historically important, vii,
153

wars of, vil, 153

fortifies passes in the Cau-
casus, Vii, 153, 187

title of, vii, 153

sons of, vil, 153

appoints Hurmuz to suc-
ceed him, vii, 155

dies, vil, 155

| Yazdagird (Isdigerd III), Shah,

EOE 2OK movies) IITs
55» 73; ix, 5, 61, 64 seq.,
68: seq.; 72, 81, 90, IOt,
105, 106, 113, I15, 116,122
Reign and Era of, 176, ix,
64
Note on, ix, 64
taken for safety to Istakhr,
ix, 64
age of, at accession, ix, 65
difficult position of, ix, 65

| Yazdagird, historical importance

of reign of, ix, 65

flight of, from Ctesiphon, ix,
67
Hulwan, ix, 68

last attempt of, to recover
his empire, ix, 68
392

Yazdagird, concentrates his
forces at Nahavand, ix, 68
defeated and a fugitive, ix,
69
death of, referred to, ix, 69
host returns to, after [Kkdadi-
siya, ix, 85
hears of Rustam’s death, ix,
85
quits Baghdad, ix, 88
makes for Marvy, ix, 89
entrusted to Mahwi by
Farrukhzad, ix, 95, 96
at Marv, ix, 97, 116
hears of the coming of the
Turks, ix, 97
betrayed by Mahwi, ix, 98
defeated, 1x, 98, 116
miller and, ix, 99 seq.
described, ix, 99, IOI
Mahwi bids miller slay, ix,
107, Lio
slain, stripped and flung into
stream, ix, 108, Iog and

note
corpse of, recovered, la-
mented over and en-

tombed, ix, 109 seq.
Firdausi on, ix, 111
Yazdagird, chief scribe, temp.
Nushirwan, vii, 304, 307,
312, 333, 337, 339, 394
discourse of, vii, 305
questions Buzurjmihr, vii,
308
Yazdan, viii, 75
Yazdanbakhsh (Ayin
Gevs);, VI 75,70
Yazdin, vill, 195, 196
Year, New, festival at, i, 104
Yima (Yama, Jamshid), i, 7,
130, 374
legend of, i, 129
Yokel, a, 264
entertains Bahram Gur, vii,
43 Seq.
wife of, her converse with
Bahram Gur, vil, 45
presage of, vii, 46
rewarded by Bahram Gur,
vii, 48

Gashasp

1 Not the same apparently as those above,

GENERAL

 

INDEX

Youths, two, bid Ardshir Papa-
kan not to tarry in his
flight from Ardawan, vi,
ZO 222
Youths, two’, entertain and coun-
sel Ardshir Papakan in
the matter of the Worm,
vi, 207, 239 seq.
help Ardshir Papakan to

slay the Worm, vi, 242,.

244

_ Yudhishthira, eldest of the five

Pandavas, iv, 138
renunciation of the world,
' and pilgrimage to heaven

of, compared with that of

Kai Khusrau, iv, 138

| Yunan, vi, 95 and nole, viii, 258

Faith of, vi, 95

a2,
| ZAB, lesser, tributary of Tigris,
vu, 189
Zabul, Zabulistan = Nimruz=
Sistan,* I4I, 142, I44,

156; i, 248, 252, 254, 264,
282, 324, 332, 357, 361,
364, 366, 367, 371, 375;
38h) dl, 2 2one A Ore
83, 92, 126, 138, 141, 142,
156,168, 227, 228, 2455
260, 339; 302, 303m; mails
14, 134, 141, 145, 153, 165,
T7Ly L7Aae £75, OO, OO
199, 200, 202, 206 seq., 217
ZAHN 250, 200m 2i74p eo 2us
326, 342, 347, 354, 356;
iv, 147, 279, 283, 296, 311;
v, 85, 86, 167, 169 seq.,

17350 7 5enSeg., Lol, wseges
LOB) LO4; 202, 2h5 eo:
223% (22A. 235 ZAG. 2 5ily
252, 255, 256, 258, 265,
20090273 0.2750 Seg.n Zour
283, 2050569. 7. 1 ViymeOves
Vil, 51-738 M07) OSs uve
369; ix, 75

invaded by Shamasas and
Khazarwan, i, 345, 358

2 See p, 333 note.

 

.

ute
GENERAL INDEX 393

Zabul, vintage of, ii, T10
occupied by the Turkmans,
i, 19>) Ail, 14, 36
Gushtasp goes to, v, 85
‘Moon of=Rudaba, v, 190
~ and nofe
called ‘‘ Babblestead ” by
Asfandiyar, v, 216
Bahman’s sojourn in, v, 252,
2560
pillaged by Bahman, v, 287
Bahman quits, v, 290
Zabuli, a native of Zabul, iii,
188, 201, 257, 326; v, 212
a, made king of Kabul, v,
=
Zad Farrukh, suggests Bahram
Chuibina to Hurmuazd,
villi, 99
speech of, viii, 241
Zadsham, king of Turan and
grandfather of Afrasiyab,1,
2, 342 seq., 376; iv, 149,
163, 166, 203
offspring of =Afrasiyab, iv,
178
Zagros, mountain-range in wes-
tern [ran, viii, 189
Zahhak (Azhi Dahaka), son of
Mardas, Arab king and
Shah, 140, I4I; 1, 42, 90,
OL) Ih 33201, 326 5 1,
257; iv, 89, 206, 272, 274,
290 ; V, 12, 180, 203, 204,
284; vi, 15, 45, 172, 209,
240 and note; vii, 185,
199; vili, 218, 239, 241,
387, 391; ix, 25, 65,
103
protagonist of idolatry and
of the Semitic race, 1, 54,
143, 226, 256
one of the Zoroastrian triad
of evil, i, 59 and note
referred to by Moses of Cho-
rene, i, 72, 144
Story of, 140, i, 135 seq.
tempted by Iblis, i, 136 seq.
father of, 140
murdered by, i, 137
referred to, vili, 387

Zahhak, becomes king of the

Arabs, i, 137

serpents grow out of the
shoulders of, 1, 139

Iblis’ advice to, 1, 139

invades fran, i, 139

captures and slays Jamshid,
i, 140

Reign of, 740, 1, 141, seq.

Note on, i, 141, seq.

not destroyed, i, 143

feast in celebration of over-
throw of, i, 143

dream of, 1, 147
Arnawaz’ advice to, con-
cerning, i, 148

takes counsel with the archi-
mages, 1, 149

watned by Zirak, i, 149

seeks for Faridun, i, 150

slays Abtin, i, 151, 153
Birmaya, i, 152

burns Faridun’s palace, i,
152, 158

Kawa and, Story of, 140, i,
154 seq.

Kawa revolts against, i, 156

Faridin resolves to war
with, i, 157
marches against, i, 159

capital of, i, 161
entered by Faridun, i, 161

talisman of, overthrown by
Faridun, i, 161

sought for in vain by Fari-
dun, i, 162

minister of, 740, 1, 164 seq.

hears from IXKundrav of Fari-

* dun’s doings, i, 165

goes to fight with Faridun,
i, 166

enters his palace, i, 167

overthrown by Faridun, i,
168

Surtish’s counsel to Faridtin
concerning, i, 168, 169

fettered to Mount Dama-
wand, i, 169

future final destruction of,
i, 173

saying of, ii, 171 and nole
394

GENERAL

Zabhak, an Aryan myth, ix, 65

king of Babylon, tx, 65
an Arab, ix, 65

Zahir, Iranian hero, iv, 148

commands the Bedouins in
Kkai Khusrau’s army, iv,
148

Zainig7u, Zainigav, ti, 81
Zairi-vairi (Zariadres, Zarir, q.v.),

AVS LOR ee

Zal (Dastan, Dastan-i-Sam, Das-

tan-i-Zand, Zal-i-za1), son
of Sam and father of
Rustam, I41, L42, 153,
154, 156, 1575 4, 145, 235,
B84) 38755 ied. Seg.
18, 19, 27, 33 seq., 49, 58,
65, 62, 60) 77, 140; 1168;
169, 180, 182, 227, 228,
271, 280; 290; 318; #310;
338, 3025 370 eelllneSs 17;
TOm Zien 22,0 oh ume eo
138, I41, 147, 190, 202;
221, 245, 269, 274, 279,
283, 307, 321, 322, 325,
328, 331, 347, 351, 354,
BH Suce Ve ul 4722202515
27 PRESTON VS Wil eA SS LS;
58, 86, 169, 173 seq., 197,
200, 204, 210, 212, 219
séq., 231, 240 seg., 246,
255, 256, 261, 277 seq.,
231, 2ozse 29035 Vien 79
Wills) 22355 ie 25

va1ious names of, i, 84, 245
and note, 248 and note

born with white hair, i,
240 ‘

cast away by Sam, i, 241

found and brought up by
the Simurgh, i, 242

seen by a Caravan, 1,
242

informed of his parentage by
the Simurgh, i, 245

given a teather by the
Simurgh, i, 246

restored to Sam by the
Simurgh, i, 247

goes with Sam to court, 1,
249

 

INDEX

Zal, horoscope of, taken, i, 251

made regent of Zabul by
Sam, i, 253

progress of, in the arts, 1, 255

makes a progress through
his realm, i, 256

Rudaba and, story of, i, 257
seq.
referred {to;, 11,8285

hears of, and falls in love
with Mihrab’s daughter,
i, 257 seq.

described, i, 260, 268

sees Rudaba’s handmaids,
i, 263

interview of, with Riidaba’s ©

handmaids, i, 266
invited to visit Rudaba, i,
267, 269
goes to Rudaba, i, 270 seq.

plights his troth to Rudaba, '

Ly 272

consults the archimages on
the matter of Rudaba, i,
273

writes to Sam, i, 275

go-between of,with Rudaba,
i, 280

sends Sam’s letter to Ru-
daba, i, 280

goes to plead his cause with
Sam, 1) 2292

bears a letter of appeal from
Sam to Minuchihr, i, 295

well received by Minu-
chihr i, 306

astrologer’s presage
cerning, 1, 307

questioned by the arch-
images, i, 308

answers the archimages, i,
309

con-

displays his accomplishment

before’Minuchihr, i, 311
returns to Sam, i, 316
goes with Sam to Kabul, i,

317
felicitated by Sam, i, 318
married to Rudaba, i, 318
and Riudaba go to Sistan, 1,
319

i ii a i cic a aio at i

os oe
GENERAL

Zal, left regent of Sistan by Sam~

i, 319

summons the Simurgh to
succour Rudaba, i, 320

goes with Rustam and Mih-
rab to meet Sam, i, 324

bids Rustam take Mount
Sipand, i, 329

hears of Rustam’s success,
1, 332

bids Rustam destroy the
hold of Mount Sipand, i,
355

informs Sam of Rustam’s
exploit, i, 334

buries Sam, i, 358

hears from Mihrab_ that
Shamasas and Khazar-
wan are invading Zabu-
listan, i, 359

goes to the help of Mihrab,
i, 359

shoots arrows into the ene-
mies’ camp, i, 359

slays Khazarwan, i, 360

wounds Kulbad, i, 361

puts Shamasas to flight, i,
361

hears of the
Naudar, i, 364

fights with Afrasiyab, i,
368

proposes the election of a
new Shah, i, 370

reproached by the [fran-
ians, i, 375

reply of, 1, 375

bids Rustam prepare for
war, i, 376

gives Sam’s mace to Rus-
tam, i, 378

collects horses for Rustam,
i, 378

marches against Afrasiyab,
i, 381

urges the Iranians to choose
a Shah, i, 381

sends Rustam to summon
Kai Kubad, i, 382

goes to do homage to Kai
KKhusrau, iii, 17

death of

 

INDEX

Zal, witnesses Kai

395

Khusrau’s
oath to avenge Siyawush,
iii, 22

son of=Rustam, iii, 132

meets Giv, iii, 321

savings of, ili, 316, 351

summoned by the [Iranians
to remonstrate with Kai
Khusrau, iv, 278

sets out for fran with Rus-
tam and sages, iv, 279

met on arrival by Gudarz
and other chiefs, iv, 282

holds converse with the
franians, iv, 282

audience of, with Kai Khus-
rau, iv, 283 seq.

asks pardon of Kai Khus-
rau, iv, 290

holds, with other chiefs, at
the bidding of Kai Khus-

rau, an assembly on the
plain, iv, 291 seq.

Kai Khusrau’s gift to, iv,
295

companions of, rewarded by
Kai Khusrau, iv, 297

returns thanks, iv, 298

protests against Luhrasp’s
succession, iv, 301

acknowledges Luhrasp as
Shah, iv, 302

sets out with Kai Khusrau
on his pilgrimage, iv,
306

turns back at the bidding of
Kai Khusrau, iv, 307

laments the loss of the pala-
dins and returns to Iran,
iv, 310

promises fealty to Luhrasp,
iv, 311

Rustam and, welcome Gush-
tasp to Sistan, v, 85

hears of Bahman’s ap-
proach, v, 182

interview of, with Bahman,
v, 183

give Bahman a guide to
conduct him to Rustam,
v, 184
‘

hake

pare

396 GENERAL INDEX

Zal, Rudaba and,
Rustam to

me

bidden by | Zand, comment, i, 65
prepare to | Zandavasta, i, 116, 129, 144, 171

yt

receive Asfandiyar, v, 190

Rustam recounts his inter-
view with Asfandiyar to,
v, 196

Rustam and, vilified by
Asfandiyar, v, 201

receives a message from
Rustam by Zawara, v,
230

grieves Over
wounds, v, 234

summons the Simurgh to
Rustam’s aid, v, 235

goes to Rustam and Asfan-
diyar, v, 247

forebodes Rustam’s future,
Vv, 247

father of Shaghad, v, 260,

Rustam’s

263

sends Shaghad to be brought
up at Kabul, v, 264

laments for Rustam, v, 273

sends Faramarz against
Kabul, v, 274

bids Rudaba to cease to
mourn for Rustam, v,
278

receives and replies to Bah-
man’s hostile message, v,
285

goes to meet Bahman, v,
286

palace of, sacked, v, 286

Bishuitan intercedes for, v,
288

released and returns to his
palace, v, 289

Zal-i-zar (Zal, q.v.), i, 84, 248 and

note

Zam (now Karkhi), town on the

left bank of the Oxus
beween Amwi (Charjui)
and Tirmid, where, there
was a crossing-place, u,
394, 395; iv, 65, 157; Vil,
soe

=Oxus, ll, 97

Zamyad, Yasht, i, 338
Zamzam, iv, 258 note

 

S€q-, 234, 337, 338; 369);
ii, 8, 25 seq., 81, 118, 189,
190; Ul, SF 1v, Theos
253, 259, 308; v, II seq.,
30, 36, 41, 43, 51, o2one
100, 173, 170, 200}. 24me
294, 299, 309; Vi, 17, 55,
226, 252, 343,350) pues
200, 207, 283, 302; viii,
Q6; 2407 26212

traditional origin of, i, 61
discussed, i, 62

language of, i, 63 seq.

meaning of, i, 65

origin of chief characters in,
1, 65

diffusion of traditions in, i,
65

extant portions of, i, 70

note

quoted, i, 99, 130, 141, 142,
172, 235, 309; viii, 218,
240

sent by Gushtasp to every
clime, v, 77

burnt by the Turkmans at
Balkh, v, 92

passage from, metrically
paraphrased, vii, 318

| Zanga, Iranian hero, 145, I5I,

Il, (73)90,1228, 240; eer,
318; ill, 20, 34, 43, 45,
48, 67, 92, 115, 350; iV,
13, 15, 24, 105, 147

takes part in the Fight of
the Seven Warriors, ii,
107 seq.

accompanies Siyawush
against <Afrasiyab, ii,
226

sent on an embassy to Afra-
siyab, li, 250 seq.

goes with Rustam to rescue
Bizhan, ii, 334

opposes Farshidward, iv,
83

chosen to fight Akhast, iv,

97
slays Akhast, iv, 106
GENERAL INDEX

Kai Khusrau remon-
strated with by, and
other nobles, for refusing
audience, iv, 275
Zangila or Zangula, Turanian

hero, I5I, iv, 26

chosen to fight with Furt-
hil, iv, 97

slain by Furthil, iv, 101

Zarang, former capital of Sistan,
situated some _ twenty
miles from the north-
eastern shores of Lake
Zirih, 1, 4

Zarar, vi, 200

Zarasp, son of Minuchihr, i, 248 ;
iv, 147 (?)'

kindred of', go to the
temple of Azargashasp,
iv, 270
go to meet Zal and Rus-
tam, iv, 282
go with Zarir to Run, iv,
360
Zarasp or Zarasp, son of Tis, 147,
lil, 24, 54, 57, 59, 60, 67,
PIES) WEA Ver 35
goes against Farud, iii, 53
referred to, iii, 55; iv, 149
burial of, ili, 68

Zarasp, treasurer of Kai Khus-

rau, iv, 269
makes gifts to Azargashasp,
iv, 269

Zarasp, franian hero, iv, 180, 301

Zarathustra, Zarathushtra. See
Zarduhsht.

Zarduhsht (Zarathushtra, Zoro-
aster), prophet, law-giver,
and evangelist of ancient
fran, 255, i, 53, 116, 235,
S20 erly. Oy) IV, 2725
V,1Quseg:,, 23° S&q., 27). 20,

Sees Lae 200; 220;
217, 241, 255; Vi, 55, 252,
328 ; vii, 9, 207, 264, 318 ;
vill, 67, 213, 308

Zandavasta revealed to, i, 61
title of a line of priest-

princes, i, 61

Zanga,

597

Zurduhsht, account of, i, 62

meaning of, v, 13

legend of, v, 14 seq.

converts Gushtasp, v, 18,
33

success of evangel of, v, 34

plants the Cypress of Kish-
mar, V; 27; 34

advises Gushtasp not to pay
tribute to Arjasp, v, 35

referred to, v, 36, 38, 41

slain at Balkh, v, 92, 93

amulet given to Asfandiyar
by, v, 130

religion of, under the Sasa-
nian empire, vi, 251

girdle of, v, 16; vi, 332 note.

Fire-fane of, vii, 139

high priest of, converts
Sapinud, vii, 139

saying of, vili, 218, 240

Zarduhsht, high priest, 170, viii,

81

visits fzid Gashasp in prison,
vili, 82

visit of, reported to Hur-
muzd, viii, 83

poisoned by Hurmuzd, viii,
83 seq.

Zariadres (Zairi-vairi, Zarir, g.v.),
v, 26

legend of, iv, 314 seq.

Zarir (Zariadres, Zairi-vairi),
brother of Shah Gushtasp,
T5405 5, 4, 42); WW 3)5 sav,
3I5, 316; 318). S475. “Vv, rey
13, 24 seq., 37, 41 seq., 49
seq., 60 seq., 73, 94, 109,
169, 181, 193, 254, 261

sent by Luhrasp in pursuit
of Gushtasp, iv, 320

charger of, iv, 321

returns with Gushtasp, iv,

consulted by Luhrasp, iv,
323, 358

advises Luhrasp, iv, 358

goes with other chiefs on a
mission to Rum, iv, 359

reaches Halab, iv, 360

1Jt is not clear which Zarasp is intended,
398 GENERAL

entrusts the host to
Bahram, iv, 360
goes to Cesar’s court, iv, 360
audience with Cesar of, and
recognition of Gushtasp
by, iv, 360
gives Luhrasp’s answer to
Czesar, iv, 361
visited in his camp by Gush-
tasp, iv, 361
informs Gushtasp of Luh-
rasp‘s abdication in his
favour, iv, 362
Love-story of, v, 26, 27
Death-story of v, 26, 27
converted by Zarduhsht, v,
33
answers, inconjunction with
Asfandiyar and Jamasp,
Arjasp’s letter, -v, 42
death of, foretold by Jam-
asp, v, 51
receives the standard and
the command of the cen-
tre from Gushtasp, v, 55
prowess of, v, 61 seq.
slain by Bidirafsh, v, 63
Zarir-nama, v, 26, 27
Zark, town south-east of Marv,
ix, 98
canal of, ix, 98
corpse of Yazdagird flung
into, ix, 109
recovered from, ix, 10g
ford and toll-house of, ix,
100 and note
chief of, 1x, 100
hears from miller about
Yazdagird, ix, 109
Zarmihr. See Rizmihr.
Zarnush, city in Khuzistan, vi, 35
Zartusht Bahram Pazdhu,
author of the Zartusht-
Nama vevOM
Zartusht-nama, poem, v, 18
Zav, Shahel42. 143i) .9G04 On,
BST sil eie es OL 263
Reign of, 242, i, 309 seq.
Note on, i, 369
mentioned in the Zanda-
yasta, i, 369

Zarir

 

 

INDEX

| Zav, accession of, i, 370

drought and famine in the
time of, i, 371

concludes peace with the
Turkmans, i, 371

dies, i, 372

| Zawara, brother of Rustam, 146,

157, ii, 4, 96, 228, 347,
3493 ill, 30, 202, 325,
328; iv, 24, 34; V, 173,
T74, LO2y Seq.5 Loy miei
227 200) aZOw

engaged in the Fight of the
Seven Warriors, ii, 110
seq.

worsted by Alkts, ii, 115

rescued by Rustam, ii, 115

made leader of Rustam’s
host, ii, 142

left in charge of Rustam’s
host, ii, 161

goes on embassy to Human,

ii, 176

safe-conducts Human from
fran, ii, 176, 181, 182

incites Rustam to avenge
Siyawush, ii, 360

given a command, iv, 149

goes with Rustam to the
right wing, iv, 180

referred to, v, 186, 228,
261 .

Faramarz and, sent by Rus-

tam tos “bid (Zal) fand
Rudaba prepare to re-
ceive Asfandiyar, v, 190

brings Rustam’s armour, v,
218

put in charge of the troops,
Vv, 222

goes with Rustam to the
Hirmund, v, 222

Rustam ’s instructions to, v,
222

provokes the franians to
combat, v, 22

slays Nush Azar, v, 227

goes in quest of Rustam, v,
230

takes from Rustam a mess-
age for Zal, v, 230

ati
GENERAL INDEX

Zawara, grieves over Rustam’s

wounds, v, 234

goes to Rustam and Asfan-
diyar, v, 247

warns Rustam against Bah-
man, Vv, 250

Rustam and, with small
escort, go to Kabul, v, 268

goes hunting with Rustam,

v, 270
falls a victim to treachery,
V, 270, 273

death of, v, 273
body of, taken from the pit
by Faramarz, and buried
Vv, 275
Zend, language, i, 64
improper use of term, i, 64
Zeus, Babylonian, vi, 22
oracle of, consulted, vi, 22
Zhanda Razm, maternal uncle of
Suhrab, 144, ii, 149, 151
accompanies Suhrab to [ran,
li, 150
death of, ii, 150
referred to, li, 160
Zhangwi, Turkman noble, viii,

331
Zib-i-Khusrau (Ruimiya, 4.v.),
city, 167, vii, 259
Zijanak, daughter of Ardawan,
q.v., IOI, vi, 255
Story of, in Karnamak, vi,
255
Tabari, vi, 255
Shahnama, vi, 259 seq.
Zinigav, ii, 81
 Zira, father of Gurwi, 152, ui, 295,
314 5 ili, 120, 197, 199 ; lv,
G7, 99; 127, 219; Vv, 272
Zirak, an archimage, i, 150
warns Zahhak, i, 149
Zirih, sea or lake, i, 4; ii, 80; iv,
136
the Lake of Sistan, i, iv; li,
80
Zirih, son of Shah Pirtiz, vii, 170
Zodiac, vili, 394
Zoroaster. See Zarduhsht.
Zoroastrian, Zoroastrians, v, 17;
vi, 206, 251, 328

 

|

 

399

Zoroastrian, cosmogony, 1, 5

view of Buddhism as idola-
trous, i, 16

conception of destiny, i, 52

propaganda, i, 58 seq.

triad of evil, i, 59 and note

scriptures. See Zandavasta.

calendar, i, 88
adopted by Darius Hys-

taspis, 1, 59
Zoroastrianism, i, 49 ; vi, 15, 196,

ZT 2520 427, Sar. Ml,
188, 317

conceptions of, i, 5, 51, 52

original seat of, i, 56 seq.,
62

becomes the state religion,
1, 59

declines after Alexander’s
conquest, i, 60

scriptures of, See Zanda-
vasta.

under the Parthians, i, 60,
63

revival of, i, 63
based on nature-worship, 1,
116
existed before Zoroaster, i,
116
under the Sasanian empire,
vi, 251
millenia of, vi, 252
Zu’l Aktaf, title of Shapur, son
of Urmuzd, 162, vi, 323
meaning of, vi, 323
Zu’ lfakar, ii, 337 and note
Zu'l-karnain (Sikandar, Alex-
ander the Great), vi, 51
legend of, in Kuran, vi, 78,
84
barrier of, vi, 78
site of, vi, 79

|} Zur. See Gur.
| Zauran, Nushirwan’s chamber-
lain, 168

envies Mahbtd, vii, 319
plots with a Jew against
Mahbid, vii, 320 seq.
makes confession to Nushir-

wan, vil, 324
 
; b Pins. a ae
is ae

 
 
RAMAN

LAY

RNY} \\
A

\\

\\\ \
\
\\

—

‘ \ \ \\

\\
~~

1“ \
AKG

\\
A
/

\ \ \\ SN
\

<<
\\\ \ \ \
—

\ \\
\\
AN LQ
\\\
~

\\\ \

 
es SO eS Ee ES SS ee RS a a a a a i se ad | Lu” bd sd had Fad a |
PO I ee ee ee ea et ee Af, Alig ih hg Se yhye ol Is
an rye te a — ? CPs md Pr &’ 4 Ba! tw = BF ol a a bs o. . ib

a a © Ws a . * ys bd a! Lg bad i % “ iz a i ® oe . Pa bs & A Par > eS
Cre a ERR Ey ee ar Ran ic x Ky Wy
Pa PY Fd [ng oi A ee Le ‘he a Oe oy = wx yr J bf a se Se * wf te es ae re "de ke ‘J ny sh | ee ae
Ft SF ae Fy i i a a an Lae wd a s a we Fe 7 74-2 278 oe

«

*

it a iw ve = a ae ae oy a -. a te et iy  G we id = = ae - 4 "' = a
‘ an a a a a ed Pos we * Wi ce * bool x = e es 5 a » my a 7 cs
; owed rs Terres Ci a a a ae “s we & sa fat! Tati Rad tad bed hy
Ps Vy as = as. bd a ay ‘- Py te ™~ » r) : ae a a wm oe ho J Ca fa ra ; a ) eo, x Ger y Ps =a i i * hak od ‘ % eh a %
rs ae a> “ i ye: rd ; F oh ae vi + ol aa
Couveuws* LD RA AAAS AA SE AA ee
; Cas a f] Bs) Dog a ~~ + Pg - 7 ia es 5 ot ed ie co oy Co a oe om 3 a we 9° Ps ti Ls xf a ce Ti

AAT TAS Or re ; ue ri
BUI a ll ek EE
ee ee ee eA eee eer eae
TELLS AAA SAS ES | We RE oe eT te oes 7 a a va Ae eek cs — aA,
Hoe ee er eee Ree Eee ee ew we ew ee ” ian 2

- 7 Pa ae ee 2s a
bi Aude tb ASE DE SRVeR BY eS ee we ws & AAA AAAS,
A Bute he awe WAAR AS DoD ee a ee ee we at

A ae a bi fe a ae a a ae _ .

4 wa, q a Pad Seerg ser es a 9
| MO or re eee owe Bea ee Dw w& &. a ee eee eat
BO AO are rey
CSAS AAAS AAAAA i Se ce i eer i ae tat at

CRRA AM a w Mie ee ie hs ad

iw

ee ei
Sp 25 ie 4 , . a) a a a ne Las P

ye Ad eee ere el ae et oe
Bon DADAM ee a ee ee J i i ais a ae
ee Se ee a ea ie eS ETT TF
Be ed il a ae ae an. 5 a Pig ne :
at tet rr Cr aA = os ae Thi V/A ee ee 2
11.4.1.11 1.144 eee eee eee A
. ro o eee + ve ite of et tes fe tA * a A 5S Sg Fs hal +i ad lied ham ¥ of = ‘~ cd ad Co = 4
13.4 .8.44.:4.44454 La aes i eS a7 ene he i ie SEF .7
SSAA Ae PF oe & mo gt te te ky eo

7
a al al . | Hy a ci wee we o | 4, oe kgs Se ie PO aE celal 7 A mm 7 ty
a 7 ef oe a +

™ se Hi i. iM: A & Sf > a9 -
eae Kay, arn TN n po es + oy bs ‘a. oS .*s }
5 - ont. ‘

=

 

    

 

 

+ © ee <> SNe tak t) e + +
fbb ea PES SORES pale ed he Se ket od teas ral ben bee Wei no eatin
 

 
 

 
