<pb n="3"/>
PART V

THE FALL AND RESTORATION TO FAVOUR
OF BUZURJMIHR, AND THE WISDOM OF
NUSHIRWAN

ARGUMENT

Buizurjmihr, while in attendance upon the Shah during a
hunting-expedition, has a premonition of coming trouble and
immediately afterwards falls under the Shdh’s displeasure,
and is disgraced. Conscious of his own rectitude he refuses
to own that he is in fault and is treated with increasing rigour
till the Sha&h has need of his services to expound a problem
proposed by Cesar, but with his sight greatly impaired by
his sufferings.

The rest of the Part is taken up with an account of the
wisdom of Nushirwan as shown in his replies to questioners
and in his letter of advice to his son Hurmuzd.

NOTE

§2. We have other instances of such problems and “ hard
questions.” See Vol. vii, p. 5.

§§ 3. and 5. On Persian Wisdom-literature see Vol. vii.,
p. 278 seq.

§4. It is manifest from the account in the Shdhndma,
and it is probably true historically, that Nushirw4n did his
best to provide himself with a worthy successor.' In addition
to this letter of counsel we have in Part VI. the account of
the examination that his son Hurmuzd had to pass,? and some
final exhortations.*> Unfortunately

“* The best laid schemes o’ mice an’ men
Gang aft a-gley.”

1 Cf. NT. p. 252 and note. ‘p. 57. * p. 61.
3

Google
<pb n="4"/>
4 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

§1

How Nishirwadn was wroth with Bizurimthr and
ordered him to be put in Ward

Consider now the case of Buzurjmihr,
Who from the dust rose to the circling sphere,
Which will exalt one to the clouds on high,
Then bring him down in sorry dust to lie !3

It happened in those days that Nushirwan
Went forth from Mada’in to hunt. He chased
Along the wilderness the mountain-sheep
And the gazelles. The mountain-sheep dispersed.
The Shah was left behind with Buzurjmihr,
Who followed both from duty and from love.
Then from the waste the monarch reached a meadow,
And saw trees, grass, and shade. The weary Shah
Alighted from his steed to rest his eyes
Upon the grass. He saw no followers ;
The one of goodly face remained, no more.
The Shah reposed awhile upon the mead,
His head right lovingly upon the lap
Of Buzurjmihr. It was that wise king’s wont
To wear a jewelled armlet. As it chanced
This clinging armlet snapped upon his arm,
And fell beside his couch. A sable bird
Swooped from the clouds to where he lay, looked

round,

Beheld that armlet, brake the thread whereon
The gems were strung, then ate them each in turn,
The lustrous pearls and topazes alike,
Flew from the monarch’s couch, and disappeared.
At that adventure Buzurjmihr aghast
Mused at the process of the turning sky.

' Two couplets omitted.

Google
<pb n="5"/>
NUSHIRWAN

He understood: ‘“ My fall, my day of wrath,
My season of dismay, are hard at hand !”’

The Shah awoke, marked how he bit his lips,
Scanned his own arm, beheld the jewels gone,
And seeing no one of his escort there?
Conceived that while he slumbered Buzurjmihr?
Had gulped the armlet down, and said to him :—
‘“Thou dog! who said to thee: ‘ ’Tis possible
To hide one’s natural bent ?’ ’’8

But Nushirwan

Fatigued with many words his tongue in vain ;
He got no answer but a deep, cold sigh,
While Buzurjmihr stood withered by the Shah,
And by the process of revolving heaven.
That wise man marked at once the ominous sign
Of downfall and remained struck dumb by fear.
The escort of the Shah had gone about
The mead while Nushirwan was in its midst.
He mounted on his charger’s back in wrath,
And noticed no one on his journey home,
But bit his lip at Buzurjmihr the while,
And muttering much alighted from his steed,
Bade smite the sage’s face as ’twere an anvil,
And to imprison him in his own palace.
So Buzurjmihr abode there and beheld
A frowning sky. He had a kinsman, brave
And young, attending on Shah Nutshfrwan
Within the palace day and night on terms
Of intimacy. Buzurjmihr one day
Asked that dependant of the sun-faced Shah :—
‘“* How dost thou wait upon him? Let me know
So that thou mayest be more serviceable.”’

‘* Chief of archmages !”’ said the servitor,
‘** It chanced this very day that Nushirwan

1 Couplet inserted from P. * Reading with P.
? Couplet omitted.

Google

‘yr

C. 1752
<pb n="6"/>
6 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Looked so on me, his bondslave, that I said :—
* There is an end for me of food and sleep ! ’
I poured the water for him after meat,
Transgressing with the basin in the act,
And when the world-lord was offended at me
I let the basin fall.’ _
Then said the sage :—
* Arise! Fetch hither water and pour out
As thou wouldst pour it o’er the Shah's own
hands.”
The young man brought warm water which he
poured
Upon the sage’s hands with gentleness,
Who said: ** Pour thus when he requireth it,
Avoiding any awkwardness, and when
The water shall perfume the basin’s brim
Forbear to pour.”
The servitor took heed,
And on the next occasion, when he brought
The salver, poured the water as the sage
Enjoined with neither tardiness nor haste.
‘**Q thou whose love increaseth !”’ said the Shah,
‘* Who told thee this ? ”’
He answered: “ Buzurjmihr,
For he it was that taught to me the mode
Marked by the Shah, the master of the world.”
The Shah said : ‘‘ Go and say thus to the sage :— —
* With all that high estate of thine and lustre
Why didst thou seek the worse and not the better
Through thine ill nature and misgovernance ?’” ”
The attendant heard and coming quickly sought
The palace eagerly with stricken soul,
Gave Buzurjmihr the message of the Shah,
And privily received this answer back :—
C. 1753 ** My station both in public and in private
Far bettereth the monarch of the world’s.”

Google
<pb n="7"/>
NUSHIRWAN 7

The servitor returned with this response,
But counted as he went the grains of dust.
The answer made the Shah exceeding wroth.
He had the sage bound in a dismal dungeon,
And asked the servitor the second time :—
*“* How bearcth that insensate one his lot ? ”’

The messenger came with a tearful face,

And told the words to Buzurjmihr who thus
Made answer to that faithful friend of his :—
‘* My days are passed more lightly than the Shah’s.”’

The messenger turned back, came like the wind,
And told the Shah that answer, which enraged him ;
He was as ’twere a pard and bade to make
A narrow iron cage, then studded it
With spikes and nails inside, and set thereon
Withal an iron lid. Thus Buzurjmihr
Could neither rest by day nor sleep by night.
Thus for the fourth time to the servitor
The Shah said: ‘“ Take this message and bring back
His answer. Say to him: ‘ How far’st thou now,
Environed as thou art by piercing nails ?’ ”

The attendant came and gave the message sent
By that imperious prince. Thus Buzurjmihr
Made answer to the youth: ‘‘ My days are better
Than those of Nushirwan.”’

Now when the man
Returned with this reply the Shah’s face grew
All livid at the words. Out of the palace
He chose a truthful man and capable
Of comprehending what the sage should say,
Dispatched too with the messenger a swordsman,
Who acted as the exccutioner,
And said: ‘* Go to this bad, ill-fortuned man,
And say: ‘If thy reply give pleasure, well ;
If not the deathsman with his trenchant sword
Shall show thee Doomsday in that thou hast said

Google
<pb n="8"/>
C. 1754

8 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

That jail and nails and cage, and pit and bonds
Are better than the throne of Nushirwan.’ ”’
The envoy came apace to him and told
The words of Nushirwan. Said Buzurjmihr
To that good envoy: “ Fortune ne’er hath shown us
Its face. None of us is exempt from change,
And verily all good and ill will end.
Enthroned and rich or grievously oppressed,
We have no choice, we all must pack and part.
To pass from durance is an easy thing ;
The quaking is for them that wear the crown.”
That wise man and the executioner
Returned and, coming to the exalted Shah,
Narrated everything that they had heard.
The fear of evil fortune came upon him.
They bore that righteous guide from that strait cage
Back to his palace with the Shah’s consent,
And heaven turned awhile with matters thus,
While wrinkles filled the face of Buzurjmihr,
His heart grew more oppressed and worn, and both
His eyes were darkened by anxiety,
While since his travailing surpassed his gain
He wasted with his care and pined with pain.

§ 2

How the Ambassador of Cesar came to Nushirwan
with a locked Casket and how Biuzurjmihr was
set at large to declare its Contents

Now in those days it chanced that Cesar sent
An envoy with a letter to the Shah,
With gifts, with presents, and a padlocked casket,

Google
<pb n="9"/>
NUSHIRWAN

And said: “ O king of warriors and chiefs !
Thou hast no lack of holy archimages,

So let them tell, not tampering with the lock,
What is concealed therein. If they say right
We will send tribute and our wonted gifts ;
But if thy clever archimages’ hearts

Fail in this knowledge indispensable

The Shah must not ask tribute at our hands,
Nor send an army to invade our realm.

Such is the message that hath come from Cesar :
Make answer as it seemeth good to thee.”

The monarch of the world said to the envoy :—
“* This thing is not a mystery to God,

And by His Grace divine I will achieve it,
Convoking holy men to give me aid.

Abide here for a se’nnight, cheered with wine,
Make merry in thy heart and be at ease.”’

The matter proved perplexing to the Shah :
He called to him the great men and the wise,
Who all examined it in every way
To find a means whereby to loose that coil,
Examined, as did all the archimages,

That casket and that lock whose key was lacking,
But could not tell and owned their ignorance.
Now when that concourse proved of no avail

The heart of Nushirwan, the Shah, was grieved.
He said: “ The intellect of Buzurjmihr

Will search this secret of the turning sky.”

The king of kings, in sore embarrassment,
Gave orders to his treasurer to provide
A change of raiment from the treasury,

And had a choice steed saddled royal wise.

He sent them to the sage. ‘“‘ Thou must forget,”
He said, “ the hardships that thou hast endured
Because high heaven above us so ordained

That thou shouldst have affliction at our hands.

Google
<pb n="10"/>
10 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

C.1755 Thy tongue excited my displeasure: thou
Hast been the author of thine own oppression.
I am confronted with a thankless task,
The elders’ hearts have been perplexed thereby,
For Caesar hath dispatched to us from Rum
A famed priest of that land and therewithal
A casket with a tightly fastened lid
Padlocked and sealed with musk. The envoy
saith :—
* Thus said my lord: “* Reveal this hidden thing,
And let the sages and the princes say
What lieth in this casket.”’ So methought :—
* No one will see through this veiled mystery
Unless it be the soul of Buzurjmihr.’ ”’
When Buzurjmihr had listened to those words
His pain and former trouble were renewed ;
He left the prison, bathed his head and body,
And first approached in prayer the Lord of all.
Albeit innocent himself he feared
The Shah, the wrathful world-lord’s, tyranny.
He watched that day and night alike and pondered -
According to the message of his master.
What time the sun was brilliant in the heavens
He mused upon the aspects of the stars,?
He laved his heart’s eyes in the stream of wisdom,
Chose out a trusty man among the sages,
And said to him: “ My market hath been spoiled,
My vision ruined by my sufferings.
Observe upon the road the passers by,
Address them, have no fear, and ask their names.”
Forth from his house went Bazurjmihr and met
A woman hasting, beautiful of face.
That wise man vigilant informed the sage
Of all things that were hidden from his eyes,
And he as feeling for his way rejoined :—

f

' Couplet omitted and reading with P.

Google
<pb n="11"/>
NUSHIRWAN II

‘* Ask if this Moon be wedded.”’
Said the lady :—
‘* IT have a spouse and child withal at home.”’

The sage on his white roadster, when he heard
Her answer, started. Then another woman
Appeared and, seeing her, his agent asked :—

**Q woman hast thou got a chiid and spouse,
Or, being single, only wind in hand ?”

‘* IT have a husband if no child,”’ she said,

** Thou hast mine answer, suffer me to pass.”’

Just then another woman came—the third.

Her too the friend approached. “‘ My Fair!” said he,
‘“What mate hast thou who hast such goodly
carriage
And daintiness ? ”’
‘** T never had a husband,”
She said, “ I would not one should see my face.”

Now mark the inference of Buzurjmihr
On hearing these replies. He hurried on
With anxious mien. They brought him to the Shah,
Who ordered that he should approach the throne,
But was exceeding troubled in his heart
Because he missed the sage’s piercing glance,

And heaved full many a deep and chilling sigh,
Excused himself for having wronged the guiltless,
Then talked of Cesar and of Rum, and spake
Of casket and of padlock. Buzurjmihr

Made answer to the monarch of the world :—
‘* Be lustre thine so long as heaven shall turn.
Now must we hold a session of the wise,

Of Cesar’s envoy, and the archimages,

And have the casket laid before the Shah,
Before the Great, the seekers of the way ;
Then in God’s strength, who gave me intellect,
And made the right the business of my soul,

I will declare the casket’s whole contents,

Google

C. 1750
<pb n="12"/>
12 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And lay no hand on it or on its lock.

Although mine eyes be dim my heart is bright ;

The breastplate of my soul withal is knowledge.”
The king joyed at the words. His heart grew

fresh

As roses in the Spring. Anxiety

Bent him no longer, and he called for envoy

And casket, summoned all the archimages

And mighty men, and seated many a sage

With Buzurjmihr, then told the ambassador :—

** Repeat thy message and demand an answer.”’
The Ruman, hearing, loosed his tongue and thus

Told Cesar’s words: “ From the victorious world-

lord

We look for wisdom, knowledge, and renown,

And thou, O master of the world! hast Grace,

And stature, greatness, lore, and might of hand.

The wise archmages—seekers of the way—

The chiefs and heroes that attend upon thee,

Are either all assembled at thy court,

Or are thy lieges still where’er they be.

If these shrewd-hearted sages shall behold

This casket with its lock and seal and stamp,

And state distinctly what is there concealed,

So that their statement shall accord to wisdom,

Then by this token I will send to thee

The tribute that my realm can well afford ;

But if in any wise they fail herein

Ask not for tribute from our land again.”
Whenas the sage had heard the speaker’s words

He loosed his tongue and offered praise and said :—

“Qh! be the world’s Shah Shah for evermore,

May he be eloquent and fare with fortune !

Praise to the Master of the sun and moon,

Who showeth to the soul the path to knowledge,

And knoweth all things manifest and hidden ;

Google
<pb n="13"/>
NUSHIRWAN 13

I covet knowledge, He is past all need.

Within the casket are three lustrous pearls,

And greater coverture than I have said.?

One pearl is pierced, the second is half pierced,

The third hath had no intercourse with iron.”
The Ruman sage, on hearing, brought the key

To Nushirwan who looked. Concealed within

There was a pyx, and in the pyx a veil

Of painted silk, and in the silk three jewels,

Just as the wise man of [ran had said,

Because of those three gems the first was pierced,

The second half pierced and the third intact.

Then all the archimages praised the sage

And showered gems on him. The king of kings

Became of joyful countenance and filled

The mouth of Buzurjmihr with lustrous pearls.

His conduct in the past oppressed his heart,

He writhed, his face grew furrowed: why had he

Dealt so oppressively with Buzurjmihr

From whom he had experienced love and faith ?

The sage, when he beheld the Shah’s shrunk face,

And grief-pierced soul, revealed what had been

hidden,

Declared all that had passed to Nushirwan,

Told of the armlet, of the sable bird,

The liege’s care, the slumber of the Shah,

And added: ‘“ This was doomed to come to pass,

And sorrow and remorse will profit not.

When heaven is intending good or ill

What are Shah, archimage, or Buzurjmihr ?

God hath implanted in the stars the seed,

And we must write the sentence on our heads ;

So let the heart of Nushirwan, the Shah,

Rejoice exempt from pain and grief for ever.

Exalted though the Shah be yet his state

1 Reading with P. * Id.

Google

C. 1757
<pb n="14"/>
C. 1758

14 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Is made more gracious by his minister.

The chase, war, pleasure, largess, justice, feast,

These are the business of the king of kings.

He knoweth what Shahs did in days of yore,

So by that token let him do the same.

To gather treasure, to provide the host,

To chide, speak, hear the suppliant, and take
thought

For rule and treasure, these things are a care,

That, heart and soul, the minister must bear.”’

§ 3
Discourse on the Responses of Nushirwan

Thus was it at the time of Nushfrwan :

He was at once the Shah and paladin,

At once a warrior and archimage,

The Fire-priest and the captain of the host.

He had his emissaries everywhere,

And trusted not the world to ministers.

None could conceal from him in great or small

The good and evil of the world’s estate.
One day a loyal archmage of his agents

Took on himself to put this to the Shah :—

** One time without reproof thou passest by

A fault. Another time the same offender

Is hung howe’er much he excuse himself !”’
The Shah replied: ‘‘ When one doth own his

fault

I am as leech, he is as wretched patient

That would avoid the dose and sheddeth tears ;

If that dose fail I leech his soul no more.”
Another archmage said to him: “ Be blest,

And sheltered from all ill on every side!

Google
<pb n="15"/>
NUSHIRWAN 15

The captain of the host went from Gurgan
With privacy, and entering a wood.
There for a while he slumbered. The Gurkils
Bore off his baggage! He was left unfurnished,
And, further, turneth back on that account ! ”’
The Shah made answer thus: “ We do not need
That militarist. How can he guard troops
Who cannot guard himself ? ’”2
Another said :—
‘“* Live happy evermore with archimages
To sit, to banquet, and repose with thee !
There is a famous chieftain present here,
Whose treasure passeth thine! ”’
The Shah replied :—
‘Yea, rightly, for he is our empire’s crown.
I tender both his treasures and his life,
And toil to magnify him.”’
Said another :—
** Great king! live ever and unscathed by ill!
Among the captives carried off from Rum
Are many babes unweaned.”’
He gave this sentence :—
‘“* The little ones must not be reckoned captives.
We will dispatch them glad and in good case
To their own mothers.”’
People wrote to him :—
‘* A hundred wealthy Rumans offer ransom.”
“If they are doing it through fear,” he said,
“‘ Sell each chief for a cup of wine and ask
No more because we do not lack their goods.
I will require their jewels, purses, slaves,

1 Mohl translates :—‘* Le Sipehbed est sorti un jour de Gourgan
en secret, est entré dans un bois et y a dormi pendant quelque temps ;
ses bagages étaient sur un autre steppe, il n’avait rien avec lui et
fut obligé de s’en revenir pour rejoindre ses bagages.’’ Nouschirwan
répondit par cette sentence: ‘ Je n’avais pas besoin d’unc escorte ;
celui qui veille sur l’armée ne s’inquiéte pas pour lui-méme.”

Google
<pb n="16"/>
C. 1759

16 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

And gold and silver with the scimitar.”

They told him: ‘“ Of the rich men of the city
There are two merchants and they keep folk waking
The best part of the night with shouts of revel,
And twanging of the rebeck and the harp.”

He made them this reply: ‘“‘ No hardship this,
And do ye others that are wealthy too
Live like these twain in mirth and jollity ;
Be inoffensive and live unaggrieved.”’

One day they wrote to him: “ Mayst thou be

happy !

Far from thee ever be the evil eye !
The monarch of Yaman observed at court :—
* When Nushirwan doth ope his mouth to speak
He talketh so much of the dead that those
Alive have their glad lives made sad thereby

He answered thus: “ All wise and high-born men
Speak of the dead: the friendship is not sound
Of any that would purge the heart of them.”

Another said: ‘*O Shah! thy youngest son
Doth act not with the justice of his sire.

He buyeth an estate at such a rate
As to aggrieve the seller ! ”’
Said the Shah :—

‘* This is not well, so let the seller keep
Both price and land.”’

‘OQ Shah,”’ another said,
‘* Imperious, far from blame and from reproach !
Thy heart was gentle once: why hath it grown
So overbearing and so choleric ? ”’

He thus made answer: ‘I had no teeth then,
And fed on milk because I could no other,

But since my teeth came, and my back grew

{*”

straight,
My quest is flesh because I have grown strong.”’
Another said: ‘‘ I own that thou art mighty,

Google

<pb n="17"/>
NUSHIRWAN 17

Our better both in counsel and in knowledge,
But how hast thou surpassed the kings of kings,
And made the whole world watch thy policy ? ”’
‘“* My wisdom is a thing,”’ he thus replied,
‘““That is beyond their ken. Sense, knowledge,
counsel—
These are my ministers, my treasury
Is earth, my treasurer thought.”
Another said :—
‘“Q king! thy hawk in chase hath bound an
eagle !”’
Thus said he: ‘* Beat its back; why should it
fall
Upon its better ? Gibbet it on high ©
To suffer in its turn, for e’en in fight
The subject may not seek to conquer kings.”’
Another chief—one of the emissaries—
Said thus: ‘O monarch of the world! Barzin
At morn departed with the host and met
A reader of the stars who prophesied :—
‘None will behold again this haughty chief,
This mighty army, and its equipage,
When once their backs are turned upon the king!’ ”’
The Shah replied: ‘ Revolving heaven hath
shown
Barzin’s designs a loving countenance,
And stars and sun and moon will not destroy
That chieftain with his treasure and his host.”
Another archmage said: “ The king, one day,
Bade choose a man, illustrious by birth,
To make the circuit of the sovereignty
Both for the sake of justice and to send
Reports concerning matters great and small,
And good or evil, to the court. Gashasp
Is both illustrious and old: ’twere well
That justice be administered by him.”

VOL, VIII. B

Google

C. 1760
<pb n="18"/>
18 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

The Shah replied: “‘ Gashasp, though far from
want,
Is still possessed by greed. Choose some one else,
Who toileth not upon his own behalf,
And is possessed of treasures of his own,
One of experience, upright and austere,
Whose first concern is for the poor.”’
One said :—
“The chief cook hath a grievance ’gainst the Shah
And chiefs, and saith: ‘ I dress his favourite meats,
And serve them at cross roads. He savoureth not,
Nor toucheth, them!’ That loyal — servant
quaketh.”

“Too much food may disgust,” the Shah replied.
Another said: “ All thoughtful people blame
The king of kings because he goeth forth
Without an ample escort, and the hearts
Of all his friends are full on that account
For fear some enemy with ill designs
May suppliant-wise contrive to get at him.”

He made this answer: “ Equity and wisdom
Protect the great king’s person. Right sufficeth
To guard the just Judge though he be alone.”

Another said: ‘ O wisdom’s mate ! the prince
Of Khurasan said on the riding-ground :—

*I know not why the king recalled Garshasp.’ ”

The Shah made answer: ‘ He hath left undone
My bidding and ignored my purposes :

I ordered him to ope for good or ill

My treasury’s portal to deserving folk.

The man that is a niggard in his gifts
Concealeth all the monarch’s Grace divine.”

Another said: “ The great king is a magnate
With all men, and munificent and holv.

What hath Mihrak, that ancient servant, done
To have his pay reduced, his visage wan ?~

Google
<pb n="19"/>
NUSHIRWAN 19

The Shéh replied: ‘“‘ Mihrak hath grown too
bold,
Relying on his former services.
He came to court and took his seat bemused,
And he was never save with wine in hand.”
An archmage of the intelligencers said :—
‘* The Shah, when marching to encounter Cesar,
Called only the Iranians to the war,
And so fran became hard pressed by Rum.”
He answered: “ This hostility is innate,
Tis war with Ahriman.”’
Another time
One ventured to observe: “ The Shah selecteth
Troops differing from those of former Shahs.
What look’st thou for in charger-riding Lions,
Expert of hand, upon the day of battle ? ”’
He thus replied: “‘ The cavalier of war
Ne’er must be satiate of combating.
Feast and the field of battle must be one
To him both by bright day and darksome night.
He never faileth in the hour of need,
And few or many make no odds to him.”
Another said: ‘‘ O Nushirwan, the Shah !
Live ever joyful and with youthful fortune.
A man was at the gateway from Nisa—
A servant and a trusty officer—
Who at the reckoning at the taxing-office
Was found short by three hundred thousand drachms.
He pleaded: ‘ All are spent.’ Chiefs, archimages,
And tax-collectors are concerned.”’
The king,
On hearing how the archimages claimed
The money from the officer, commanded :—
** Press not for what is spent: give him too some-
what
Out of the treasury.”’

Google

C. 1761
<pb n="20"/>
20 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Another said :—
‘** A gallant cavalier was hurt and long
Disabled. Cured he charged the ranks of Rum,
Fell, and hath left behind him little ones.”
The Shah commanded: “ Be four thousand
drachms
Assigned to them out of the treasury,
Because when any one is slain in war,
And leaveth babes as his memorial,
Whene’er the scribe shall read out from the roll
His name, his children must have drachms, so pay
A thousand thus to them four times a year.”
Another said: “ Be happy all thy days.
At Marv the captain of the host hath gathered
Much wealth in money but he spendeth not,
And people are abandoning the march.”
He thus made answer: “ Give that wealth—the
cause
Whereby the land is made depopulate—
Back to the folk from whom it hath been taken.
Make proclamation of the fact in Marv,
And bid erect a gibbet at his door,
In sight of all his province and his troops,
And hang alive the tyrant on the gallows,
Head-downward, that hereafter nobody
Among our paladins may turn aside
In heart and spirit from our ordinance.
Why must he bleed the poor to get him wealth,
And joy his body to his soul’s destruction ? ”’
Another said: * God-fearing Shah ! thy subjects
Throng in thy court, extol thine equity,
And praise the Maker for thee.”
He replied :—
‘* Thank God that we inspire alarm in none.
Be it ours to tender yet more carefully
Both innocent and guilty.”

Google
<pb n="21"/>
NUSHIRWAN 21

Said another :—

‘““O Shah endowed with Grace and understanding !
The world is full of joy, delight, and sweets,
And lord and liege are dizzied in their heads
At night-fall with the din.”’

‘* In us,’”’ he answered,
‘“May small and great rejoice throughout the

world.”’

Another said: “‘O Shah of power supreme !
Detractors speak with blame of thee and say :—
* He squandereth vast treasures but he never
Hath felt the labour of amassing them.’ ”

He thus returned reply: ‘“ If I withhold
The wealth laid up within my treasury
From those deserving of it all my gain
Will turn to loss at last.”

Another said :—
‘““O thou exalted king! God grant that scath
May never come upon that soul of thine!
The Jews and Christians are thine enemies,
Are double-faced, and worship Ahriman.”’

He answered thus: “A brave Shah is not great
Save he be tolerant.”’

** Mardwi! hath spent,”’
Another said, ‘‘ three hundred thousand drachms,
Famed king! out of thy treasury and more
On mendicants, and chiefly on himself.”

He said thus: “‘ Such withal is our command :
‘Tis well for thee to give to the deserving.’ ”

Another said: ‘ O Shah that toilest not !
Much largess hath made void thy treasury.”

He thus returned reply: ‘‘ The open hand
Doth start a man afresh, both leaf and bough.
The world-lord, when a worshipper of God,

Hath at his disposition all the world,

1 Reading with P.

Google

C. 1762
<pb n="22"/>
C. 1763

22 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

But we have seen it niggard to the mean,
And greed and harshness tempt not me.”’
<4 O king ! 93
An archmage said, ‘‘ shrewd Kurakhan hath wrung
From famous Balkh three hundred .thousand
drachms,
And handed them to us who laid them up
Among thy treasures.”
** We,” he made reply,
‘** Require not drachms through others’ sufferings,
So give them back to those from whom they came,
With somewhat also from the treasury,
Because the world-lord that adoreth God
Hath no desire to vex his subjects’ hearts.
Raze Kurakhan’s fine palace and enrich
His roofs with clay. His palace shall be waste,
His profit toil and, after toil, distress
And malison. Take from our roll his name,
And hold of no account his likes at court.’’
Another said: ‘“ O Shah of glorious race !
Thy converse turneth greatly on Jamshid
And on Kats.”
Thus Nushirwan replied :—
““Oh! may our knowledge keep them ever young !
I speak of them that mine own head and crown
May be remembered after I am dead.”
** Why hideth,” asked another man, “ the Shah
His secrets from the illustrious Bahman ? ”
The Shah replied: “‘He turneth him from
wisdom,
And eateth of the fruit of his own lusts.”
One said: “ O Shah that tendereth thy subjects ?
Why hast thou recently become remiss ? ”’
He thus made answer: ‘I associate
With sage and archimage, for when the voice
Of Ahriman is at our ears our hearts

Google
<pb n="23"/>
NUSH{RWAN 23

Grow void of counsel and our brains of sense.”’

An archmage asked the monarch of the earth
To speak concerning kingship and the Faith,

And said: “ A man of wisdom will allow
A faithless better than a kingless world.”

He thus made answer: “I have said the same,
And holy men have heard my words. The world-lord
Ne’er saw a faithless world though every one
Hath his own Faith. One man adoreth idols,
Another’s Faith is pure. One said: ‘A curse
Is better than a blessing,’ but mere words
Will never wreck the world, so speak thy mind.
But when the great king too is void of Faith
No one will bring down blessings on the world.
Faith and the sovereignty are like the body
And soul; the twain support the world.’’!

“QO Shah
Of joyous nature! thou hast oft observed,”’
One said, “* before the chiefs : ‘ What time the throne
Is destitute of king then Faith and wisdom
Are worthless.’ Once thou saidest: ‘I am fortune,
And fortune’s pretext both for good and ill,
And when one uttereth praises in the world
The crop in secret cometh back to me.’ ”’
He answered: “ Yea, ’tis well. The great king’s
head
Is fortune’s crown. The world is as the body ;
Kings are its head and crowned accordingly.”’
Another said: “ O Shah, the people’s friend !
Be thine the sovereignty and length of days!
Five days have passed, O lustre of the soul !
Since last the high priest came before thy presence.”’
He answered: “I am not concerned thereat,
For he is occupied on mine affairs.”
One said: “‘ O Shah of sunlike Grace to whom

1 Cf. Vol. vi. p. 250.

Google
<pb n="24"/>
C. 1764

24 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Time will bring forth no peer! we see a suitor
Attending court each morn, and that affairs
Are wrong with him, but wot not of his grievance.”
He answered: “ In Hijdz! thieves plundered him
Of countless goods. That he may not be troubled
I have replaced them from the treasury,
And keep him at the court on this account
To see if he can recognise the thieves.”’
Another said: “‘O Shah of glorious birth,
The lord of bounty and the lord of justice !
Down from the time of Gaiimart till now
No Shah like thee hath filled the royal throne.”’
He said: “I give thanksgiving unto God
That matters are as He would have them be.”’
The sentences of Nushirwan are past,
The world is old but ever young my care ;
My genius hath not blossomed to this last
Though keen it grew, such fire in eld was there !?
For many a year I told this history
Though hidden ’twas from Saturn, moon, and
sun,
But since Mahmud’s name crowned my poetry
Its commendation through the world hath run.
The idolators of Hind he bringeth down
With sword whose sheen, like silk of Wash,’ is
bright.
Oh! may the age fare well through his renown,
And in his diadem the heaven delight.

1 Reading with P. In A.D. 575 the Persians overthrew the
Axumite power in Arabia and conquered Yaman. The Hijaz would
come to some extent within their sphere of influence.

* Couplet omitted.

*‘*son épée damasquinée comme une broderie.’’ Mohl. Wash
is the name of a city in Turkistan, famous for its silk.

Google
<pb n="25"/>
NUSHIRWAN

§ 4
Nushirwan’s Letter of Counsel to his Son Hurmuzd

Now read the letter of Shah Nushirwan,

And muse upon it in thine ardent soul.

He said: ‘“ This letter grateful to the heart,
Instructed, learned, well counselled, and abstruse,
Is from the Shah exalted and sun-faced.

Great is he, heaven inclineth to his wish,

The world-lord he, just and beneficent,

Without reproach, the lavisher of treasure,
Increaser of Kubad’s renown and throne,
Transmitter of the crown of state and justice,
Possessed of Grace and stature, fame and conduct,
And all that he could wish for from the crown
Of greatness, to Hurmuzd, our own pure son,
Who heartily accepteth all our counsels,

And 1s through God glad and victorious,

For evermore a world-lord crowned and throned.
This lucky month upon the day Khurdad,

With fair stars and world-brightening presages,
We set upon thy head the crown of gold,

As we ourselves received it from our sire,

And give thee too the blessings which Kubad,
The glorious, bestowed upon our crown.

Be vigilant and master of the world,

Be wise and noble and without offence,

Increase in knowledge and incline to God,
Because He is the Guider of thy soul.

We have inquired of one of good discourse,

One ancient both in wisdom and in years :—
‘What man of us approacheth nearest God ?
Who goeth by the straitest path to Him ?’

He gave reply : * Choose knowledge as thou wouldst
That people should bless thee because the sage

Google

25
<pb n="26"/>
26 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

C. 1765 Deriveth not addition from the dust :
Make thy pure spirit then approved by knowledge.’
Through knowledge doth the Shah adorn the

throne :

Mayst thou be sage and of victorious fortune.
God grant thou never be a promise-breaker,
For promise-breakers have the dust for shroud.
See that thou punish not the innocent,
Or listen to the words of slanderers.
Let every ordinance of thine be just,
For justice will delight thy spirit. Seek not,
As thou wouldst be the lustre of thy throne,
To compass falsehood with thy tongue. Secure
A subject in the enjoyment of his wealth,
For others’ havings are no friends of thine :
Joy in the wealth that thou hast earned thyself.
"Tis thine to be the asylum for all folk,
For overlord and underling alike.
Reward the man that acteth uprightly ;
Oppose withal the evil-doer. Although
Thou mayst be held in honour in the world,
Forget not travail, misery, and loss ;
Be what one may this is a Wayside Inn
Wherein it booteth not to feel at home.
Seek worth and be associate with the wise
If dost wish that fortune shall commend thee.
By knowledge bind the hands of tyranny,
As thou wouldst scape the evil of mishap,
And dearly tender him who in thy presence
Hath trodden under foot thy foeman’s life.
The great men and the merchants of the city
Must have their share of justice. When thou settest
The crown of king of kings upon thy head
Discern the worse way from the truly great.
Keep ever in thy presence some wise man,
And hold him as thy body and thy soul.

Google
<pb n="27"/>
NUSHIRWAN 27

In matters great and small pay no regard

To any save the accomplished and well born.
Give not the worthless battle-gear for when
Thou seekest it ’tis not to hand. Thy friend
Will yield thee to the foe; a double task
Both difficult and wretched will be thine :

He will bring down thy weapons to the field,
And one day will employ them on thyself.

Be generous to persons in distress,

Avoid ill-doing, fear calamity,

Discern the hidden motives of thy heart,

Make no mere outward show of good and right,
Be not unmeasured in beneficence,

And hear the counsels of the experienced.
Lean toward religious men but watch religion,
Because it causeth bitterness and wrath.
Proportion thine expenses to thy means,

And be not careful to augment thy store.
Observe the precedents of former Shahs,

And be a righteous judge in everything ;

The Shah that doth unjustly is accursed ;
Approve but justice then and court not curses.
Where are the crowned heads of the kings of kings ?
Where are.the great men and the ministers ?
Their fame is now their sole memorial ;

This Wayside Inn abideth not with any.
Command not to shed blood, or urge the host
To battle, lightly. Heed this weighty letter.
Set not thy heart upon this Hostelry.

Herein have I but sought thy good and decked
Thy heart with knowledge by the rede of Him
Who ruleth sun and moon; by Him keep off
The influence of the Div. Have thou before thee
This letter, day and night. Let wisdom rule
Thy heart. If thou dost make a memory here
Thy name will never want for majesty.

Google

C. 1766
<pb n="28"/>
28 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

Now be the Maker of the world thy refuge,
May time and earth affect thee. May high heaven
Turn but at thy desire and in the world
Be none aggrieved by thee.”

He placed the letter,
When written, in the treasury and abode
With fear and trembling in this Wayside Inn.

A king of kings well counselled, wise, and just,
Will strive to make his modesty unite
With strength of hand and gallantry in fight,
Be of pure Faith and put in God his trust.

See what man of these virtues is possest
And, seeing, him his meed of praise prefer,
Seek one that is as bright as Jupiter,

Aspiring, armed with sword, with mail on breast ;

Who taketh from idolaters the sway,
Who with brocade of Faith his heart hath bound.
Yea verily the man himself is found :

Mahmud is monarch of the world to-day.

The quest of battle and of banqueting
Are one to this world’s lord. Abwt’] Kasim !
God grant the age joy in the sight of him,
That open-handed and victorious king.

§ 5

How an Archmage questioned Nushirwan and how he
made Answer

There was an elder versed in our old speech,
And antiquate with action and discourse,
Who from a volume in the ancient tongue

Google
<pb n="29"/>
NUSHIRWAN 29

Saith that an archmage asked of Nushirwan :—
‘** In what way should the worshipper invoke
In secret prayer the Master of the world
That He may give an answer and bestow
Withal fair fortune on his suppliant ?
A man, with arms outstretched toward the sky,
May make request before the Lord of time,
Yet gain not his desire for all his prayers,
And hath but tearful eyes and furrowed face.”
The conquering Shah replied: ‘“‘ Be moderate
In thy requests to God; when they pass bounds
A heart o’ercharged will come of that desire.”’
The archmage asked: ‘‘ What man deserveth good,
And who is worthiest of the name of ‘ Great ?’ ”
The Shah replied: “ He that amasseth treasure
Without exertion, and bestoweth not,
Is unfit for the throne; from time to time
His fortune will grow dark, but well is he
That giveth. Give, if wealth be thine, and hoard
not.”’
‘** What is the base of wisdom ?”’ asked the arch-
mage,
‘* And who rejoiceth in its boughs and leaves ? ”’
** The sage rejoiceth,’’ Nushirwan repfied ;
** So doth the modest man of noble birth.”
The archmage asked: ‘‘ Who profiteth by know-
ledge,
And who is witless and calamitous ? ”’
The Shah replied: ‘* The cherisher of wisdom
Will cherish life which profiteth thereby
When it aboundeth, but its lack entaileth
Grief, care, and loss.’’
The archimage inquired :—
‘Is knowledge better than the Grace of kings,
For Grace and majesty adorn the throne ? ”’
‘* A sage possessed of Grace,”’ replied the Shah,

Google

C. 1767
<pb n="30"/>
C. 1768

30 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Will take the whole world underneath his wing.
Thou needest wisdom, Grace, renown, and birth ;
With these four heaven will keep thee still in mind.”’
“In kingship who illustrateth the throne ? ”’
The archmage said. ‘“* Who is unfortunate ? ”’
And Nushirwan made answer: “ One that seeketh
First for the aidance of the King, the World-lord,}
For bounty, knowledge, and right usages
Will make him tender toward the suppliant.
Next let him give authority to those,
Who merit such distinction by their worth.
Then let him see that nothing in the world
For good or evil is concealed from him.
He should distinguish, fourthly, foe from friend :
Tis well that kings should be without offence.
When he hath Grace and wisdom, Faith and
fortune,
Then he is worthy of the crown and graceth
The throne, while if thou findest such things lacking
Good sooth! thou wilt behold him lustreless ;
He after death will leave an evil name,
And win not jocund Paradise at last.’’?
The archmage asked: *“‘ How many modes of
speech °
Are there and what are they, because o’er some
One needs must weep while others are crown,
treasure,
And reputation, those grief, these content ? ”’
Said Nushirwan: ‘ The sage hath classified
The modes of speech and thought the matter out.
First, profitable speech ; the sweet-voiced sage
Saith that it is the harmless. Secondly,
That which thou callest the deliberate
Know to be that of shrewd and fluent men,
For they speak® largely to the*point and leave

1 Reading with P.  * Five couplets omitted. ‘Reading with P.

Google
<pb n="31"/>
NUSHIRWAN 31 1

Their memory in the world. Next is the speech
Of one ambitioning the word in season ;
He will abide in honour all his years ;

And, fourthly, that of one called by the sage
Delectable—the competent reciter,

Who uttereth all, both new and old, in verse ;
While, fifthly, is the warm deliverance

Of one of sweet tongue and harmonious voice,

Who when he hath impleached his web of words
Attaineth verily his heart’s desire.”

The archmage said: “In spite of all thy lore,
And thou hast kindled all thy soul with knowledge,
Yet thou still questionest the little worth !

Dost say then: ‘How shall knowledge have an
end ?’”

The Shéh replied : ‘‘ From all that I have learned
I have attained my soul’s desire and wisdom.
Avoid wrong-doing then and look to knowledge—
A thing more precious than the crown and throne.”’

The archmage said : “I have seen none so praised
And eminent for lore that one could say :—
‘Such is his eminence that no wise man
Can teach him any further.’ ”’

Thus the Shah
Replied: ‘“‘ Can treasure satiate a man
Until he lieth underneath the dust ?
The way of knowledge is more glorious
Than wealth, more precious in the sage’s eyes.
Our words remain as our memorial :
Compare not wealth with knowledge.”

Said the archmage :—

‘“* What with their learning and remembering
The sages cannot be but ancient men.”’

The Shah replied: ‘‘ Although the man be old
His knowledge faileth not to keep him young.
Thou wilt prefer him to the foolish youth,

Google
<pb n="32"/>
C. 1769

32 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Whose dust is only valued for its tomb.”’
The archmage asked : “‘ It was thy wont to speak
About the fortune of the kings of kings
Before the Great,’ and more than ever now
Thou namest them but with a deep cold sigh ? ”’
The Shah said: “‘ It was never in my heart
That I should praise a process such as this—
To govern this world with the scimitar
Of justice, then pass on and vilely die.”’
** Thy usage,” said the archmage, “ in the past
Was this—to speak to all in nobler words.
Now. thou despisest them and sayest naught
About the past or present.”
Nushirwan
Made answer saying: ‘I have talked enough,
And now I purpose to depend on deeds.”
The archmage said: “ Thy prayers in former times
Before the Fire were not so long as now.
Thy praises too are longer than they were,
Thy plaints and supplications more profuse.”’
He gave this answer saying: “ Holy God
Exalteth from the dust His worshipper,
Doth favourably dispose the sky toward him,
And maketh all the world to be his slave.
If this slave faileth to appreciate,
Let him not scape from hardship and distress.”’
The archmage asked: “Since thou becamest
king
What greater cause for thankfulness hast thou
Toward thy Maker ? Hath that eminence
Increased thy joy and filled thy foemen’s hearts
With blood ? ”
He answered thus: ‘* Thanks be to God,
Our fortune hath been good. None in my presence
Hath ever sought for the supremacy,

+ Reading with P. and T.

Google

<pb n="33"/>
NUSHIRWAN 33

But at my chastening washed his hands of ill.
My foemen have grown feeble in the fight
When they beheld mine onset and my mace.”
The priest went on: “‘ When warring in the West
Thou wast both quick of clutch and valorous,
But when thou wast campaigning in the East
Thou wast long-suffering and deliberate.”’
And Nushirwan made answer thus: “ The youth
Accounteth not of pain and toil of mind,
But when a man hath come to sixty years
He must assume a gentler attitude.
Thanks to the World-lord who is all-providing,
The Author of the good and ill of fortune,
That I had prowess in my youthful days,
And recked not if my luck were good or bad.
Now knowledge, treasure, generosity,
And rede, accompany my days of age,
The world is ’neath my rule and usages,
And circling heaven my breastplate in the fight.”’
Said the archmage: “ The Shahs of long ago
Desired to hold discourse on all affairs ;
Thy words are briefer and thy secrets more,
Yet thou surpassest those famed men of old.”’
He made this answer, saying: “‘ Every king,
That doth believe in Him who giveth all,
Is not concerned about himself for He,
Who made the world, still watcheth over it.”

‘I see the kings who should be glad of heart,”
The archmage said, ‘* most anxious in our times.”
And Nushirwan replied: “‘ The man of sense

Hath ever at his heart the fear of loss.”’
The archimage rejoined: ° The Shahs of old
Allowed not care and fight to mar their feasts.”
He made this answer saying: “In their cups
They ever grew forgetful of their fame,
But fame hath triumphed o’er the cup with me,

VOL, VIII. C

Google
<pb n="34"/>
34 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

My spirit is beforehand with the time.”’
The archmage said: “Shahs used to tend them-
selves,
Employing drug and leech and remedy,
Lest they should have to soil themselves with tears.”
“* A man, whose time is not yet come,” he said,
“* Not yet o’ertaken by the turning sky,
Will stand secure, and drugs will profit naught,
Because the chance of time protecteth him,
But when the hour for passing is at hand
Then no precaution will avert his fate.”
The archmage said: “ Thou praisest much and
prayest
The Maker, yet at heart thou art not glad
The while, but ever hast a soul all care.”
‘* There is no care at all,”? said Nushirwan,
‘* The Shah’s heart is at one with turning heaven ;
I fear that those who offer praise to me,
And shower benedictions on my Faith,
Affect a greater fervour than they feel :
Mine object is to read my subjects’ hearts.”’
“Why joy we in our children,” asked the arch-
mage,
‘* And why do we desire a family ? ”
‘“* The man that leaveth children in the world
Will not become forgotten,” he replied.
‘** If he have children he will relish life,
And for that reason will abstain from vice,
While if he pass away the pang is slight,
Because a child’s eyes watch his paling face.”
‘“* Who liveth at his ease,”’ the archmage asked,
** And who repenteth of his own good deeds ? ”’
He thus replied: ‘“‘ The worshipper of God
Will take the reins of fortune in his hands
And, seeking no addition, is at ease,
Who if he sought it would be full of fear.

Google

ee on

~ee

<pb n="35"/>
NUSHIRWAN 35

Then as for what thou said’st about good deeds,
And secret inclinations to do good,
Know, no one is more mortified than he
That meditateth good for thankless folk.”
** The evil-doer dieth,’’ said the archmage,
‘“‘The world removeth from the roll his name.
The righteous man will likewise pass away,
And destiny account his every breath.
What need is there for praising excellence
Since death is here to reap both good and bad ? ”
And Nushirwan made answer thus: “ Good deeds
Will find a ready market everywhere.
He that doth good deeds dieth not though dead,
But resteth, giving up his soul to God ;+
He that doth fail therein will have no rest,
And leave behind an evil memory.”
The archmage further said: ‘“‘ No ill is worse
Than death. If so, then what is our resource ? ”’
The Shah replied : ‘ On leaving this dark earth,
The life which then thou wilt have gained is pure.
Whoe’er lived here in fear and care must needs
Bewail that life but, whether Shah or subject,
Thou wilt be quit of this world’s fear and pain.”’
The archmage asked him: “ Which is worst of
these
In filling us with anguish and chagrin ?”’
The Shah made answer: “ Reckon mountain-heavy
The troubles that descend on us in troops,
And what is fear except the fear of troubles,
Than which there is naught stronger in the world ? ”
‘* How can we ’scape from these ?”’ the archmage
asked,
** For this world’s doings give us cause to weep ?”
He thus made answer : ‘“‘ Knowledge is the way:
The sage is ever cheerful.”

1 Couplet omitted.

Google

C. 1771
<pb n="36"/>
30 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

** Which of us,”’
Inquired the archmage, ‘‘ hath most store of trea-
sure >?”
The Shah made answer: “ He that hath least
toil.”
The archmage asked : “ Which is the foulest fault,
One alien most from worth and Paradise ? ”’
The Shah made answer: “ In the case of women
A strident voice and lack of modesty ;
But, in the case of men, to be a fool,
And thus to spend a lifetime as in prison.”
The archmage asked:‘* Who hath most confi-
dence ? ”’ .
‘* He that hath least remorse,” replied the Shah,
‘* And goeth soiled in body, and with heart
Black with iniquity, before his God.”’
The archmage said: ‘‘ Who is the upright man,
Whose heart is proven by his soul and wisdom ? ”’
The Shah thus answered: “ He that toileth on
Through gain and loss and compasseth no ill.”
The archmage asked : ‘‘ Who is the best of men,
The crown upon the head of all mankind ? ”’
‘* The meek to whom a crown availeth naught,”
The Shah replied ; “ not one intent on profit,
Not even though he be of lofty aims ;
Next, he whose greatness is its own reward—
The generous man whose heart is purged from dark-
ness—
And, thirdly, he that hath a zeal divine,
Proceeding from integrity and wisdom.”
‘“'What,” said the archmage, “is the _ heart’s
chief dread ?”’
‘‘ The troubles that we bring upon ourselves,”’
The Shah replied.
‘““ What giving is the best,”
The archmage said, ‘‘ so that the man who giveth

Google

<pb n="37"/>
NUSHIRWAN 37

May be exalt and great ?”’
“‘ In gain and loss,”’
The Shah rejoined, ‘ keep naught from the deserv-
ing.”
The archmage asked concerning this world’s
doings :—
‘“* Declare its process open and concealed.
Whate’er the manner of that action be,
For loss or profit, shall we acquiesce ? ”’
““The All-knowing,” thus the Shah replied, “ is
greater
And higher than this ancient sky although
It knowing be and mindful; He is Lord
Of this world’s lords. Become not then perverse,
Avoid disaster, and attribute not
Good fortune and misfortune to the sky.
Know that both ill and good proceed from Him
That hath no peer—the One eternal Cause,
Whose word is * Be’ and what He willeth is,
Who was and is and will be evermore.”

‘“* The body is the hostel of the soul :

Which of them feeleth pain ?” the archmage asked.

The Shah replied : ‘‘ Our mortal bodies suffer
So long as they have brains, but when the soul
Hath filtered through they lose their consciousness,
And when it hath departed are dissolved.”’

The archmage questioned him on self-control :—
‘** In what way can we hide our greed and need ? ”’

The Shah replied: “‘ ’Tis fitting that the sage
Suppress them, yet thou ever wilt be vexed
By greed because ne’er satiate of treasure.”’

The archmage asked : “‘ Among the kings of yore,
The men of sense, rede, faith, and precedent,
Whom knowest thou as subject of our praise,
When he is dead, O monarch of the earth ? ”

“That great king,’”’ this was Nushirwan’s reply,

Google

. 17

f
<pb n="38"/>
C. 1773

38 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

‘* Who is a worshipper of God and pure,
And thankful to the righteous Lord of all,
Who filleth none with fear of tyranny,
Who giveth to the good a hopeful heart,
And to the bad a heart of fear and pain,
Who furnisheth his troops from his own treasures,
And turneth on malignants their own ill,
Who questioneth the sages of the world,
And keepeth from his foes his bad and good.”

The archmage asked : ‘‘ Wherein consisteth worship,
And who approacheth to God’s holiness ? ”

“* The subtle will direct,’ the Shah replied,
‘‘ His soul as by fine hair-breadths and first know
The being and the unity of God,
Which small instruction will make evident,
And he will offer thanks for mercies given,
While putting trust in God and fearing Him,
Who is thy terror when thou seekest ill,
Thy trust when thou dost well. If thou art sound
Of Faith and seek’st the Way all will esteem thee,
While if thou art malign and ill-disposed
Thy soul hath forwarded its packs to Hell.
Feel not at home with this world for *twill hold
Its secrets from thee. Tend to works of Faith;
Thy good choice will not injure thee. Let wisdom
Instruct thy heart and let not fortune fool thee.
Again, thou shalt consort not with the guilty
In wrong and strife. Loathe secretly at heart
This world because of that which is to come.
Let thy seat ever be among the sages,
A devotee of everlasting joys,
For what we have on earth will pass away,
And reason counteth them no joys at all.
Mayst thou incline to sense and rede. Let wisdom
Guide thee to God. Speak not unmeasured words,
For thou’rt new-fangled and the world 1s old.

Google
<pb n="39"/>
NUSHIRWAN 39

Be drunk not with the pleasures of the day.

Choose not the company of wicked men.

Refrain thy heart from what can never be,

And give such largess as ’tis fit to give.

Withhold not from a friend aught that thou hast,

Though he should ask thine eyes, thy brains, and
skin,

And if two friends would take account together

No daysman should be needed for that task.

If thou associate with a foe so act

That he may not obtain a hold upon thee.

When one doth seek the path of right his need

Is parts, humility, and gentleness.

Let not thy tongue exaggerate thy merits,

For falsehood is no merit with the just,

Who hold one’s high estate a thing of naught,

Another’s poverty no mark for scorn.

If some malicious person talk with thee

Let not his malice anger thee, and then,

When, being well assured that thou art weak,

He useth language that is past all bounds,

Reply to him in measured terms and speak

Words goodly and well-liking. If it be

That thou canst bring him to himself by kindness

He will repent his former speech. Devote not

Thy leisure to indulgence. Idleness

Is naught if thou art wise. Be diligent

In all thine undertakings and give ear

To knowledge. Enter on no enterprise

Whereof the end will cause remorse or anger.

Have pity on the sad in his distress ;

Bring not his heart to anguish and disaster.

The sage that traineth his own heart to patience

Is not held worthless in the World-lord’s eyes,

But knoweth what he meriteth with Him,

And compasseth all actions with discretion,

Google
<pb n="40"/>
40 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

For increase from a friend is laudable,
And greatness and integrity will bring
Addition. Furthermore that man of God
Will not begrudge the scattering of treasure,
But turneth him from waywardness and loss,
And maketh right and service his profession—
A stem with boughs whereby God’s worshipper,
The virtuous saint, hath proved victorious.
There is but one injunction and one way—
Incline to God and let Him shelter thee.”’

C. 1774 If thou, O monarch ! art of just intent
Good will remain to be thy monument
As it doth with Shah Nushirwan whose flesh
Hath turned to dust although his fame is fresh.
Himself unseen his fame is plain to all;
His words survive as his memorial,
And through the righteous deeds that he hath done
His fame past doubt will live while time shall run,
And on his soul shall be, while earth and sky
Abide in place, the sages’ eulogy.

Google
<pb n="41"/>
NUSHIRWAN 41

PART VI

THE SHAH’S LAST YEARS

ARGUMENT

The poet tells of the last war of Nushirwan against Rim
and of the Shah’s transaction with a shoemaker, the appoint-
ment of his son Hurmuzd as his successor after that prince
had been questioned by Buzurjmihr, the Shah’s testament
and last counsels to his son, his dream of the advent of
Muhammad, and the death of the Shah and of Buzurjmihr.

NOTE

§§ 1-3. After ten years of peace war again broke out
between the Persian and Roman empires in A.D. 572. The
Shéhnaéma is correct in representing that the latter was to
blame for the renewal of hostilities. The Emperor Justin
II., who had succeeded his uncle Justinian in A.D. 565, wanted
war. The scene of operations covered much the same ground
as on the previous occasion. The Persians made a raid into
Syria, recorded in the Shahndma by the mention of Halab
(Chalybon-Beroea, Aleppo), and an unsuccessful attack on
Antioch. The Romans, under Marcian (Batarun), the prefect
of the East, besieged Nisibis, held by the Persians ever since
its cession to Shapur, son of Urmuzd (Sapor II.), by Jovian
in A.D. 363. Nushirwadn raised the siege, drove the Romans
into the stronghold of Dara on the foot-hills of Mount Masius,
and besieged them there. After a gallant defence the fortress
fell late in A.D. 573.1. Mount Masius seems to be the Mount
Sakila of the Shahnama, the scene of one of Gushtasp’s exploits
during his exile in Rum.? Justin on this resigned the direction

' For Dira see GDF. v. 86 and mole. "See Vol. iv. p. 342 seq.

Google
<pb n="42"/>
42 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

of affairs to Tiberius who to gain time purchased a temporary
suspension of hostilities from the Persians. This is repre-
sented in the Shéhnama as the conclusion of peace and as a
triumph for Nushfrwan but historically the war was still in
progress at the time of his death four years later, and the
Great King, shortly before the end of his reign, had to make
a somewhat hasty and ignominious retirement to Ctesiphon.}

§ 2. We have already met with the cobbler or shoemaker,
introduced as characteristic of a type, in the Shahndma.?

§§ 4-6. See p. 3.

§7. P. omits this section which of course comes from
Muhammadan sources. Though interpolated into Persian
story it does not seem to be an interpolation in Firdausi’s
Shé&hnaéma for there appears to be no good reason for supposing
that the passage was written by a hand other than that
poet’s. A similar account appears both in the Persian and
Arabic Tabari.%

The ascent of two score degrees is intended to indicate that
Muhammad was forty years old when he received his “ call.”

Muhammad, having been challenged by idolaters to divide
the moon in twain, is said to have pointed his finger at it, on
which it was at once divided into two parts, one of which
remained stationary while the other was concealed behind
&@ mountain. Another tradition says that Mount Hira inter-
vened between the two halves. Travellers from a distance
when questioned reported that they had observed the same
phenomenon.‘ The passage in the Kurén on which the tradi-
tions are based runs as follows :—“* The hour hath approached
and the MOON hath been cleft :

But whenever they see a miracle they turn aside and say,

This is well-devised magic.’’5

The Stra in which the quotation occurs is known as ““ THE

MOON.”

1 RSM, p. 437 * See Vol. vil. pp. 24, 260.
* ZT, li. 235, NT, p. 253. ‘ KM, Pt. II. Vol. ii. p. 753.
* RK, p. 74.

Google
<pb n="43"/>
NUSHIRWAN

$1

43

How Ntushirwadn made ready to war ayainst Cesar

It is recorded in the ancient book

From the recital of a truthful sage

That when news came from Rum to this fair land
For Nushirwan, the world-lord: ‘* Mayst thou live,
For Cesar is no more and to another

Hath yielded time and earth,” death filled his soul
With care; his ruddy countenance became

Like yellow leaves. He chose out.of fran

An envoy of experience and high birth,

And then dispatched him unto Cesar’s son,
Dispatched him to that fresh and fruitful Bough,
First charging him with many kindly words,

And saying: “ ’Tis an evil none can ’scape.”’

He wrote a letter in distress and grief, .
With eyes all tearful and cheeks sallow, thus :—
“* God grant thee life and loving-kindliness
Now that thy sire is dead. No living thing
Is born unless to die. A Wayside Inn
Is this and we pass on. Although we handle
The crown or helm and casque we find no quittance
From death’s clutch. What is Cesar or the Khan
When his time cometh and all suddenly
Shall lay his head in dust ? Mayst thou receive
No lack of joyful tidings of thy sire ;

May Christ befriend his soul. Now I have heard
That thou art seated on his famous throne,

And hast adorned the fortune that was his.
Require of us such strength as thou dost need
Of steeds, of arms, of treasure, and of troops.”

The ambassador went forth from Nushirwan ;
He made the journey in all haste to Cesar,

Google
<pb n="44"/>
C. 1775

44 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!

And, when he reached the court, they gave him
entry ;
The envoy of the Shah approached the state.
When Cesar saw the title on the scroll
His heart swelled at the pride of Nushirwan.
He was a hasty youth, new to the throne,
Showed himself overbearing to the envoy,
Saluted him in an unseemly fashion,
With lax observance and discourtesy,
Gave him a lodging distant from the court,
And took no notice of the Great King’s letter.
A week passed, Cesar’s counsellors assembled,
And he addressed their leader: “* Now consider
The answer to this letter, draw it up,
As thou dost know to do, in fitting terms,
And set forth good and ill.”’
The priest replied :—

** Thy liege am I and will obey the world-lord.”’

So all the bishops, priests, and counsellors
Assembled by themselves apart and then
Wrote with all speed a letter in response,
As Cesar bade, and first they praised the Maker,
And based their praise on wisdom, then they said :—
** Was such a letter worthy of the Shah,
A letter graceless and malevolent ?
Thou dost amiss for Cesar is but young,
But lately crowned, our king in right of birth.
Forbear to press the youth for this one year
With haughty superscriptions, tax and toll.
The youth hath written in befitting terms
To all the lieges and the potentates,
As the illustrious emperor of Rim,
To whom the mountain-tops are so much wax.
The envoy of the Shah hath come to us,
And he will tell the Shah what he hath seen
With us—our words of grief and joy alike:

Google
<pb n="45"/>
NUSHIRWAN 45

Our weal and woe shall not remain concealed.
One Cesar hath departed but another
Succeeded who exalteth o’er all chiefs

His head without regard to any king

Among the underlords and overlords.”’

When they were ready with that Ruman letter

They summoned the ambassador to court.

That sage, on hearing that they were advised,

_ Came to the court and asked for the response.
They made him ready an unworthy robe

Of honour and put strangers from the hall.
Then Cesar said to him: “ No slave am I,

The inferior of the Haitalians dnd Chin.

One should not lightly treat a potentate
Although thy Shah be Great King in the world.
He that hath many enemies Is great,

And I have foes and friends upon my skirts.
Why dost thou scant me of my majesty,

And cloud my sun ? Thou, when such need is mine,
Shalt be my king, my father’s memory.

Make fair report of thine experience here,

And seek no foul intent in my response.”’

They put the robe of honour on the sage,
And called the marchlord’s roadster to the door.
He parted hastily and, tarrying not
At any stage, reached Nushfrwan and told
What he had seen and heard and what had passed.
The Shah was sorry at the words and said :—

‘** Thou hast had fruit of travel. I have heard
That whosoe’er indulgeth his self-will, .

Not thinking what he doth, will smart therefor.
If he discerneth not ’twixt friend and foe

In telling thus the secret of his heart

To thee I ween too that he is no friend

To us and, further, hath not blood and feet
And skin. By holy God, by sun and moon,

Google

C. 1776
<pb n="46"/>
46 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

By crown and throne and by Azargashasp,

I swear that if I leave of Ruman race

A single man in joy upon the throne

I am not of the race of bold Kubad,

And in men’s presence never mention me.

Henceforth will I make black the fame of Rum,

And set the cultivated parts a-blaze.

Moreover he shall fill the ox-skins for us

With all the gems and treasures of his realm,

And my sword’s point shall touch not sheath until

I have my heart’s desire upon this Ruman,

Who arrogantly boasteth: ‘ I am Cesar,’

As though I were but ‘one among his chiefs ! ”’
He bade the clarions and the Indian bells

And gongs be sounded at the palace-gate,

And bound upon his mighty elephants

The kettledrums. The world was indigo

With dust. A host that made the green sea! quail

Marched forth from Mada’in toward the waste,

While at the blare of trump, the gleam? of flag,

And stir of horsemen in their golden boots,

Thou wouldest have declared: ‘The stars are

drowned,
And all revolving heaven is astound ! ”’

§ 2

Tlow Niishirwan took the Stronghold of Sakila and
how a Shoemaker had Dealings with him

When tidings came to Cesar of the Shah :—
‘‘ He hath marched forth in anger from [{ran,”
He set forth from ’Ammiuriya? to Halab ;

1 Cf. Vol. vi. p. 174 and note. * Reading with P.
* Cf. Vol. vi. p. 23 and note.

Google
<pb n="47"/>
NUSHIRWAN 47

The world was filled with tumult, bruit, and din.
Three hundred thousand horsemen of Iran
Besieged the fortress of Halab. Troops gathered
From every side and tarried not from strife.
The warrior-prelates of the Ruman host
Set up their catapults on every side.?
The [rdnians took the stronghold of Sakila,
For from that region they would fain attack ;
Halab became as ’twere a sea of blood,
And all the host of Batarun sought quarter ;
Unnumbered Ruimans perished ’neath the arrows,
And many were ta’en prisoners in the fight.
Within two se’nnights the franians brought
Some thirty thousand captives to the king.
The Ruimans dug a trench before their host,
And let the water in at break of day.
They barred the Shah’s advance ; he and his troops
Were at a stand in fight. He called to him
His commissaries and discussed with them
The posture of the war at large and said
Thus: “ This hath grown a matter of much toil :
We cannot pass the water and the fosse.
The troops have need of money and supplies,
As well as horses, mail, and Ruiman helms.”

The commissaries, scribes, and treasurers
Of that world-lord went the treasury,
Which, as the number of his soldiers stood,
Was in dinars three hundred thousand short.’
An archimage came to the Shah like dust,
And told him what the treasury lacked, whereat
The Shah’s face gloomed. He ordered Buzurjmihr
To come, and said to him: ‘ With treasury void
What booteth me the throne of king of kings ?
Go, call the camel-drivers, and dispatch
Some Bactrian camels on the road and take

1 Cf. Vol. i. p. 373. * Reading with P.

Google

C. 19777
<pb n="48"/>
48 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Out of the treasures of Mazandaran
A hundred loads and upwards of dinars.”

But Buazurjmihr made answer to the world-lord:—
‘““O just, wise, loving Shah! the way is long
To reach the treasures of Iran, the while
Our troops are destitute and at a stand ;

But in the cities round about are those,

A hundredth of whose wealth would pay our troops.
If thou shalt ask the merchants and the thanes
To make advances they will not refuse.”’

The Shah was in this matter of a mind
With what the wise man of [fran had said,

And Buzurjmihr chose out a messenger,

Wise, of a cheerful heart, and goodly face,
And said to him: “ Go with a second horse,
And choose thee out some lusty notable
Among the merchants and the thanes—a man
Of mighty reputation—and request
A loan of money for the troops. The Shah
Will order money to be sent with speed
Out of the treasury.”

That emissary,
Fair-spoken, young in years but old in wisdom

And shrewd, came to a neighbouring town and

asked
A loan of money for the king’s affairs,
And round him gathered many of the rich.
A certain man, who made and vended shoes,
Attended closely to the envoy’s words,
And asked: ‘* How much ?”’
The gallant envoy told,

And said: ‘O man of wisdom and of wealth !
The sum amounteth to four million drachms.”’

Said that shoemaker: ‘I will furnish them,
And earn the treasurer’s praise.”’

He brought his balance,

Google

|
H

<pb n="49"/>
NUSHIRWAN 49

Weights, and the drachms, but asked no bond in
writing. ,
He weighed the coin, the envoy’s task was done.
Then that shoemaker said: “ O fair of face !
Be good enough to say to Buzurjmihr :—
‘I have but one child only in this world,
For whom my heart is all anxiety.’
Then add: ‘ The monarch of the world perchance
Will grant a private favour to myself,
And let me place my boy among his sages,
For he hath wealth and intellect therefor.’ ”’
‘* With pleasure,’’ was the messenger’s reply,
‘* For thou hast cut my quest for treasure short.’’}
So Buzurjmihr came to the Shah rejoicing,
Whose face cleared when he saw that wealth.
Thereafter
He said: ‘‘ Thanks be to God, whom I have known
Through all my years of life, that in our realm
There is a manufacturer of shoes,
Blessed in this manner and illustrious.
God grant that we may never injure one
That is possessed of such a store of wealth.
Discover for me what his wishes are,
That this good will of his to us may last,

.And when thou payest the debt bestow upon him
A hundred thousand drachms that he may not
Forget us.”

Buzurjmihr said to the world-lord :—
‘*O well-starred Shah of goodly countenance !
God grant that no king who is tyrannous
Be happy on his throne and fortunate.
Thy subjects all are men of wealth, aspire,
And are possessed of thrones and diadems.
Now this boot-seller, if the Shah will hear,
Made one request. He said, for so the envoy

1 Couplet omitted.
VOL. VIII. D

Google
<pb n="50"/>
C. 1779

50 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Reporteth : ‘ May the world-lord mate with wisdom.
I have a son grown up who is desirous
Of one to teach him learning, and if now
The Shah is willing to assist therein,
So that my good son may become a scribe,
Then for the Shéh’s life will I pray God, saying :—
“* May this throne-worthy live eternally.” ’ ”’

The Shah made answer saying: “ O wise man!
How hath the Div perplexed thy vision! Go,
And lead the camels back, for God forbid
That we ask him for silver and for pearls.
How should the merchant’s son become a scribe,
Accomplished, learned, and mindful though he be?
Our son when he shall sit upon the throne
Will need a scribe whose fortune will prevail.
If this young boot-seller attain distinction,
And my son look to him and list to him,
The man of wisdom and of noble birth
Will have but discontent and chilling sighs,
The sage will be held lightly by my son,
Receive no praise for what he answereth,
And we shall be accursed, when we are dead,
For having introduced this precedent.
Our rations must be got by honest means.
Ask not his money, talk not of our needs,
Dispatch the camels back upon their way,
And ask shoemakers for supplies no more.”

So with the cash the envoy went again ;
Those drachms filled that shoemaker’s heart with

pain.}

' Two couplets omited.

Google

—ae Fe
<pb n="51"/>
NUSHIRWAN 51

§ 3

How the Envoys of Caesar came to Niishirwan with
Apologies and Presents

Whenas from Pisces Sol displayed its crown,
And flung a robe of ivory o’er the earth,
The scouts returning from the trench-edge came
Before the exalted Shah and said to him :—
‘* An embassage from Cesar hath arrived
In tribulation to excuse his faults.”
The ambassador approached immediately
With benedictions upon Nushirwan,
On seeing whose head and crown the Ruman
heaved
A cold sigh, thinking: “ Lo! a Shah exalted
With kingship, manhood, and a mighty host ! ”’
Two score pilosophers of Rum, whose tongues
Were full of utterance and their hearts of sighs,
Brought, each one, thirty thousand in dinars
As offerings to the king. When they beheld
His comely countenance they came lamenting,
And writhing serpent-like. The king of kings,
On seeing them, received them graciously,
Assigning them the customary seats,
And then their spokesman thus addressed him :
** Cesar,
O Shah! is young and hath but just acceded ;
His sire is dead, the world is new to him,
And he is unacquainted with affairs.
Now we are all of us thy tributaries,
And servants, and are under thy protection.
For thee Rum is Iran, fran is Rim;
Why then distinguish them ? The king of kings
Hath all the age’s wisdom for his own,

Google
<pb n="52"/>
52 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And straighteneth Cesar’s back. The Khan of
Chin,

The king of Hind, are glad in him and help
To grace his throne. Although a youth, not vet
Of man’s estate, made utterance ill-advised
Let not the king of kings, in whom the vault
Of lapis-lazuli rejoiceth, take
Revenge thereat or dudgeon. We will pay
The tribute laid on Rum from the beginning,
And keep pact.”

Smiling at the envoy’s words
Said Nushirwan: “ Although the boy be noble
His speech hath little wisdom. What is Cesar ?
What Batarun, the insensate one, whose tongue
Hath caused his soul’s abasement ? All the wise
Born of Sikandar’s stock have proved triumphant,
And eminent, yet if one doeth not
Our bidding but rejecteth our advice
And our alliance, from his peopled realm
Will we send up the dust and will not fear
His treasures and his troops.”

The envoys kissed
The ground, as courtiers use, and made replv :—
‘**O Shah that art victorious and supreme !
Blame not the past. We are thy travail’s dust,
The warders of thy treasure. When the king
Shall take us into favour we shall cease
Both from misfortune and from discontent.
The toils that here the king of kings hath borne
Are no small matter in the Rumans’ eyes,
And we will pay, by way of toll and tax,
His treasury ten ox-hides of dinars.
‘Tis thine to bid us pay thee less or more,
And to accept it though it be unworthy.”
* As touching treasure,” thus the Shah replied,

‘The matter resteth with my minister.”

Google
<pb n="53"/>
NUSHIRWAN 53

Then all the Rumans went before that archmage,
Went with loud lamentations and ill-starred,
Used every plea at large, told Cesar’s purpose,
Informed him of the ox-hides and dinars,

And matters that concerned the peace of Rum.
The archmage answered thus: “ Ye give the gold,
But what brocade will ye present as well ?

What time the king returneth he will need

A thousand pieces of gold-woven brocade,

For he is constantly concerned with gifts

Of robes of honour for his lords and lieges.”’

The Rumans gave consent thereto and then

Returning did obeisance to the Shah.

He tarried on the battlefield awhile.

Then when the king and host had taken rest
He chose among the troops a warrior—

One of ability in ciphering—

And gave him soldiers that he might demand
The Ruman tribute and convey it home.

The Shah departed thence toward Taisafun
With troops behind him and in front of him,
All furnished well with silver and with gold,
With silvern bridles and with golden girdles.

‘** The air is silken all,’’ thou wouldst have said,
** With all the silken banners of the chiefs,
While hills and plains are golden and the belts
Are like the Pleiades with jewelry.”

When he drew near the city on his march

A multitude went out to welcome him.

All came to Nushirwan afoot with loins

Girt up for service and with open hearts,

While all that had accompanied the Shah
Proceeded to the palace-gate afoot,

And all the mighty chieftains called down blessings
Upon that Shah alert and just and holy,

1 Couplet omitted.

Google

C. 1781
<pb n="54"/>
54 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

While those of greatest eminence brought gifts
Of precious stones. The Shah, on his return,
Made manifest his power to all the chiefs,

And then the warriors went home. There came
Addition in the world to each man’s fame.!

§ 4
How Nushirwdan chose Hurmuzd as his Successor

The high-souled minstrel, who instructeth me,
What said he of time’s mutability ?
“No prudent sage will set his mind and heart
Upon this Hostel whence we must depart,
For we arise and fall from day to day,
And alternate our joyance with dismay.
Dark earth will be our final resting-place,
This with high honour, that with deep disgrace,
And after they depart they tell us not
If wakeful joy or slumber be their lot ;
Still if they flourish not that pass our ken
At least they will not strive with death again.
In contemplation of that day of awe
What are five years and twenty or five score,
Passed by one man in pleasure and delight,
Passed by another in penurious plight ?
None have I seen that had a wish to die
Among the upright or the waywardly,
But all are shocked at death—the pious one,
Just as the idol-serving Ahriman.”’

Old man! when three score years and one have

past,

1 Lorsquril fut pres son palais, le roi congédia chacun des
grands, et ces heros se rendirent aux heux de leur demeure, celebrant
dans le monde entier la gloire de Kesra.”’) Mohl.

Google
<pb n="55"/>
NUSHIRWAN 55

Wine, cup, and rest grow savourless at last,
Yet wine for one that readieth to die
Is as a wool-coat when ’tis winterly,?
When body freezeth in the midst of vice,
And soul hath lost its way to Paradise.
Full many a friend hath lagged or passed away,
But in the waste the cup with thee will stay.
Unless thy life’s endeavour thou forecast C. 1782
Sure retribution will be thine at last.
Ill-doing endeth in calamity ;
If thou dost ill the world will sadden thee.
Joy not in evil that thou hast achieved,
Who, grieving others, shalt thyself be grieved.
Know that, however great may be the sum
Of these thine earthly years, thine end will come ;
So multiply thy good deeds here below '
That thou mayst gladden when thou hast to go.
The deeds accomplished and the words let fall
In life will serve as our memorial.
I ask of God from time, its Maker He,
For such a respite, such felicity,
That all these many tales and stories told,
Now over-passed by years and waxen old,
From Gaiumart to Yazdagird, which be
In disarray, may be arrayed by me;
That I may range them, weed that garth, and tell
Anew what hap the kings of kings befell,
Then verily I shall not grieve when I
Shall have to quit this Wayside Hostelry.
And now what saith the man of ardent soul
Of Nushirwan, the world-lord’s, purposes ?
The monarch at the age of seventy-four
Became possessed by thoughts of death and sought
A master for the world whose chiefest aim
Should be to clothe him in the robe of justice,

' Literally ‘‘ In (the month of) Dai.”

Google
<pb n="56"/>
C. 1783

56 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Display compassion to the mendicants,
Be great, untroubled, and of ardent soul.

- He had six sons of noble birth who all

Were great, shrewd-hearted, and of kingly mien,
With valour, learning, self-control and counsel,
Young with a love of knowledge, and of these
The wisest and the eldest was Hurmuzd,

The nobly born, a man unparalleled,

Exalted, knowing, fair of countenance, )
And well affected to the noble race.

The Shah gave orders to his officers

To test the disposition of his son,

By day and night to mark his utterances,

And to inform the monarch of the world

Of his proceedings whether good or bad.

At that time said the Shah to Buzurjmihr :—

** I have a secret purpose in my mind.

When I exceeded three score years and ten

My musky tresses took a camphor-hue, ,
And when I quit this Wayside Hostelry

A master will be needed for the world,

Who will give largess to the mendicant,

The stranger, and the man of his own kindred,

Be bounteous, will refrain from love of treasure,

And set his heart not on this Wayside Inn—

One whose whole purpose ever is toward good,
Whose place is on the Shah’s throne. I thank God

That I have sons wise, learned, who worship Him,

And none esteem I dearer than Hurmuzd,

Or more pre-eminent for rede and sense.

Of mercy, generosity, and right

I see naught lacking in his heart at all.

So summon now the archmages and the chiefs,

All that observe the way of understanding,

_

ty

1 4.e. the Persians. Hurmuzd was half Turkish by birth—the
son of the daughter of the Khan. See pp. 87, 97 seq.

Google
<pb n="57"/>
NUSHIRWAN

Ga
oe |

Prove ye his knowledge and thereby present
Accomplishment upon accomplishment.”

§ 5
How the Archimages questioned Hurmuzd and hoi
he replied

The archimages, the investigators,
And counsellors assembled, called to them
Hurmuzd, the atheling, and seated him
Among the chiefs. Then Buzurjmihr began :—
‘*“O prince fair-starred and fair to look upon!
What know’st thou that will brighten the pure soul
And wisdom, and be fruitful for the body ? ”

He answered: “ Knowledge is the best, for great
Among the great is one of understanding.
In knowledge is man’s safety ; it restraineth
The hands of Ahriman from ill, and next
Come patience and munificence whereby
The body gaineth fame and ease.”

The sage

Then asked: “ What showeth virtue to advantage,
And what will raise a man to high estate ? ”

Hurmuzd replied: “ First, to be courteous
To all in good and ill; next, to endeavour
To grieve as little as one can the hearts
Of every one; and, thirdly, to deal justly
Within the world and so gain self-content.”

On that pure-hearted prince of goodly mien
Gazed Buzurjmihr, the questioner, and said :—
** Now will I speak concerning needful topics.
Count them upon thy hands, remember all
That I shall ask, and make a just response
To them in that same order. Bring to bear

Google
<pb n="58"/>
C. 1784

58 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

High-mindedness and justice for, if thou

Art heedful of such matters, of a truth
Heaven’s gate is oped to thee since I will question
At large that I may have response in full.

The Master of the world instruct thee! May
Thy wit be bright, good fortune by thy mate.
Now will I question thee of what I know

With fairness. Answer as thy knowledge is.
The wise man is discerned by his replies,

And compasseth his will in everything.

Inquiry is the lock, response the key ;
Response discriminateth bad from good.

Who is the child dear in his father’s eyes,

Fair of behaviour, and without offence ?

What man is worthy of our heart’s compassion,
So that one needs must weep at his distress ?
What man repenteth of his own good deed,
And that too from the bottom of his heart ?
Who.is the man deserving of my blame

When I shall make inquiry of his acts ?

Who would do better if he shunned the world
Because his quiet days are at an end ?

What maketh for our happiness in life,

And what do we recall most willingly ?

Which is the time to praise ? What profiteth
Us most ? Who is the dearest of our friends,
Whose voice doth make a pleasance of the heart ?
Who is the man with most friends in the world,
That joy in him in public and in private ?
Who too is he that hath most enemies,

And most malignantly disposed to him ?}

What is the thing, the most injurious,

For which when done there is good cause to weep ?
Of all the things that mortals cherish here
What is the most unstable of them all ?

1 Couplet omitted.

Google
<pb n="59"/>
NUSHIRWAN 59

Who is the tyrant that is unashamed,

The’ man most loveless and irreverent ?

Whose words produce most ruin in the world,

And cause the greatest trouble to his friends ?

What is the matter that entaileth shame,

And evil on a man through his own words ? ”’
For one whole day till night rose o’er the hills

The sage’s words produced no weariness,

But when the darkness brought the time for lights

The chiefs’ heads darkened with bewilderment,

And, when the Shah grew weary of his words,

He paused for a reply. The great Hurmuzd

Rose to his feet and fitly praised the Shah :—

** Ne’er may the Shah be lacking to the world,

But still abide upon the imperial throne ;

Ne’er may we see the crown, the royal state,

And throne of ivory, devoid of thee ;

In their excusings may the strong be dust

Before thee, heaven thine antidote from harm.

Now will I make reply to Buzurjmihr,

And.solve his questions with a right good will.

The sage first questioned me concerning sons,

And so it is with them I must begin.

A son doth make his father glad of heart,

And freeth it from griefs, if he affect

His sire, incline to goodness, and be just.

Next, of the pitiable man, for whom

The eyelids drop their tears: this is the magnate

Whose fortune hath been scattered and he now

Is thrall to one unworthy. This man’s case

Is one to be deplored with bitterness,

Because he hath a miscreant for his lord.

Again, the man that doeth benefits

To thankless folk is all solicitude,

And one forgetful of good done to him

Would make a fool of wisdom. Then the sage

Google

C. 1785
<pb n="60"/>
60 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

Inquired for whom ’tis goodlier to seek

A resting-place by flight from tyranny ?

The wise man is at liberty to quit

The country where the monarch is not just ;
Escape is needful from an unjust king,
Because he bringeth Doomsday on the world.
The sage inquired: ‘ In what rejoicest thou ?’
*Tis in a brother or some charming fere.

He then inquired: ‘ What is the time to praise ?’
The time when we are quit of enemies :

"Tis well to praise that ever more and more.
Moreover for thy question touching friends,

"Tis good to have the aidance of all such.

If they be wealthy shelter ’neath their cloaks,
And toil with them if they be mendicants.

The humbler and the nobler that one is

The more do his friends’ hearts rejoice in him.
The sage next asketh me: ‘ Who hath a foe

By whom his heart is ever vexed and hurt ?’
The man whose tongue is bold to utter ill

Is very apt to make him enemies.?

* What is of things the most injurious,’

Thou saidest, ‘ and at last a cause for tears ?’
When passion hath the mastery of thy heart

It passeth with the passing of a breath,

But with fruition cometh penitence ;

So handle not the blossom of desire.

* What,’ he inquired, ‘is that inconstant thing
Whose feet I seek to clutch and grasp its head ?’
It is the friendship of a foolish man

Of evil nature and unstable counsels ;

And furthermore he saith: ‘ Who is the tyrant
That is all shameless and remediless ? ’

Call him remediless if he use guile,

A tyrant if he acteth shamelessly.

1 Four couplets omitted.

Google
<pb n="61"/>
NUSHIRWAN O1

As for the man whose very trade is lies,

I term him tyrannous and despicable.

* Whose words,’ thou saidest, ‘ are the cause of ruin,

Cause grief and harm but leave the speaker scath-

less ?’
The traitor and the worthless double dealer
Fill wise men’s hearts with pain. The sage in-
quired :—

* What is the fault that causeth one most shame,

And maketh him repent of his own words ?’

The foolish talker’s who doth bear himself

Vaingloriously within the sight of men,

But is, when he is private and alone,

Repentant for the words that he hath spoken,

Yet, when he next shall speak, will boast again.

The man without accomplishment is honoured

If he exceedeth not his limitations.

Those were the questions, these are my replies.

The blessings of the world be on the Shah,

May all tongues speak according to his will,

And may his noble heart be glad and blest.”
‘The king of kings was lost in wonderment

At him and lauded him right royally ;

All were rejoiced that were assembled there,

The monarch’s heart was set at large from care.

§ 6
How Niushirwdn appointed Hurmuzd as his Successor

and gave him parting Counsels

Then by the Shah’s command they wrote a patent
That gave Hurmuzd the throne and crown, and

when
The wind had dried that paper wrought in Chin

Google
<pb n="62"/>
62 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

They set a seal of musk thereon. The Shah,
In presence of the magnates and shrewd sages,
Charged the high priest therewith. I, by the grace
Of the victorious monarch of the world,
Put into verse this act of Nushirwan’s.
The world in practice doth belie its show ;
Beneath ’tis naught but dolour and chagrin,
But, whether thou hast crown or toil and woe,
Thou ne’ertheless must quit this Wayside Inn.
Peruse a letter of the kings of yore,
And see if Nushirwan hath any peer
For justice, rede, festivity, and war,
Yet, his day done, he found no tarriance here.
So turn from feast and pleasure, and be wise,
Thou agéd dotard and impenitent !
The world may still look freshly to thine eyes
When in thy cups thou scornest to repent ;
Yet still, if thou be wise, repent anon ;
The man of Faith is well advised for aye ;
The seasons of thine age will soon be gone,
Spring, Summer-tide, and Autumn pass away !
Then when thy body is in dust below
Think whither that pure soul of thine will go!
What was it that the agéd chronicler
Said of the testament of Nushirwan ?
C. 1787 When the responses of Hurmuzd were ended
The high priest entered on a new discourse.
The Shah bade, and the counsellors and scribes
Wrote out on silk a gracious document
From Nushirwan to young Hurmuzd, beginning
With praise of the All-just and then proceeding :—
** This counsel of the offspring of Kubad
Hear graciously and write upon thy heart,
Which haply through these words of mine may live.
Know that this world is faithless, O my son!
And full of toil and trouble, pain and bale.

Google
<pb n="63"/>
NUSHIRWAN . 63

Whenever thou are joying therein and when

Thy heart is free from time’s distemperature

That happiness hath no abiding-place,

And thou must quit this Wayside Hostelry.

As I resign the world to thee with justice

Thou must thyself resign it to another.

Since both by bright day and by longsome night

My thoughts are busied with mine own departure

I seek a head fit for the royal crown

To be a diadem on every head.

We have six sons—the Lustre of our heart— .

Wise, generous, and just. We have made choice

Of thee because thou art the eldest-born,

A wise man and the adornment of the crown.

Kubad, the well beloved, had four score years

What time he spake to me of sovereignty ;

Now I have come to seventy years and four,

And I have made thee monarch in the world.

Herein mine aim hath been but peace and weal

So that I might have worship after death.

My hope is that almighty God will make thee

All glad and fortunate. If by thy justice

Folk are secure through thee thou wilt thyself

Repose in peace, glad through thine own just
dealing,

And for thy good works done win Paradise,

For he 1s blest that sowed but seed of good.

See that thou ne’er lose patience; haste is ill

In kings. The world-lord that is shrewd and learned

Will be in estimation all his: years.

In no way go about to compass lies,

Else will the visage of thy fortune pale.

Keep haste afar both from thy heart and brain ;

The wisdom that is joined to haste will slumber.

Incline toward the good and strive therefor,

And list the sage’s rede in weal and woe.

Google
<pb n="64"/>
64 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

{ll must not compass thee about, for ill

Will verily result in ill to thee.

Let both thy raiment and thy food be pure,

And keep thy father’s counsels still in mind.

Make God thy refuge and incline to Him

As thou wouldst have Him for thy guide. When
thou

Shalt make the world all prosperous by thy justice

Thy treasury will prosper, fortune joy

In thee. Reward men when they act aright ;

Wait not till good men’s toil hath waxen old.

Make glad the men of parts and have them near
thee,

But keep the world dark to the ill-disposed.

In all affairs take counsel with the sage,

And fret not at the toils of sovereignty.

Whenas the wise hath access to thee, throne

With troops and treasure will continue thine.

As for thy subjects, suffer none of them

To be in cheerless case. The potentates

And nobles of thy realm must all partake

Thy good, but let the ignoble share it not,

And trust not aught to one that is unjust.

Give all thine ear and heart to mendicants,

And let their sorrows be thy sorrows too.

The chief that of his own accord is just

Will please the world as well as please himself.

Bar not thy treasury to men of worth,

But act with bounty to the virtuous ;

Still if thine enemy become thy friend

Sow not thy seed of good on that salt soil.

If thou shalt follow this advice of ours

Thy crown will be exalted evermore.

May He that giveth good wish well to thee,

Thy throne be wisdom and thy crown success.

God grant that thou mayst not forget my words

Google

co

ett
Ben mae

~.,. WA, -

<pb n="65"/>
NUSHIRWAN 65

Though thou be far removed from my sight.
May thy head flourish and thy heart be glad,
Thy person pure and far from hurt of foes.
May wisdom be thy watchman evermore,

And righteousness the subject of thy thoughts.
When I shall pass away from this wide world
A goodly palace must be built for me,
Secluded somewhere from the haunts of men,
And where the swift-winged vulture flieth not!—
A palace lifted toward revolving heaven,

And in its height ten lassoes long and more,
And thereupon let there be limned my court, —
The great men, and the warriors of my host.
Let tapestries of every kind be there

In plenty, strewings, colour and perfume.
Embalm my corpse with camphor and arrange
A crown of musk upon the head thereof.

Bring forth five pieces never handled yet

Of cloth of gold and of brocade of Chin,

And garb me in them in the Kaian mode,

As is the usance of Sdsanian Shahs,?

By which same token make an ivory throne
With crown suspended o’er the ivory,

And let the golden vessels that I used,

The goblets and the censers and the cups—

A score filled with rosewater, saffron, wine,
Ten score with camphor, musk, and ambergris—
Be set upon my left hand and my right,

No more or less, for such is my command.
Drain from my trunk the blood and afterwards
Let the dry space be filled with musk and camphor,
And lastly block the passage to my throne—
A passage that no other Shah may see.

That court will be conducted otherwise,

+ This is not at all in accord to Parsi notions. Cf. Vol. i. p. 81
s.u. Dakhma. * Reading with P.

VOL, VIII. -E

Google

C. 1789
<pb n="66"/>
66 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

And none will have e’en access unto us.
Let those among my sons and noble kin,
Who feel my death as a calamity,
Refrain from feast and pleasure for two months,
For that is usual at the Shah’s decease,
And ’twould be seemly for the good to drop
A tear on this, the Great King’s, testament.
Depart not from the bidding of Hurmuzd
And breathe not save according to his will.”
All o’er that testament shed many a tear,
And Nushirwan survived it just a year.

$7

How Nishirwadn had a Dream and how Bizurjmihr
anterpreted it as signifying the Appearance of
Muhammad

In that year Nushirwan upon a night

Amidst his prayers and praises had a dream,
Wherein his lucid spirit saw in sleep

A Sun rise in the night and therewithal

Was an ascent that had two score degrees,
Whose summit reached to Saturn in the ascendant.
From the H1jaz in stately pomp and joy

That Sun ascended that ascent, fulfilling

The world with brilliancy from Kaf to Kaf,}
And everywhere converting grief to mirth,
While all the horizons, whether far or near,
Took lustre from its glory everywhere,

And everywhere light entered save the hall

Of Nushirwan which still abode in gloom.

The Shah rose from his sleep for half the night,
And oped his lips to none on that affair,

1 Kaf=Alburz. See Vol. i. p. 71.

Google

a. ee eee
<pb n="67"/>
NUSHIRWAN 67

But when the sun unveiled its countenance ,
He summoned to his presence Buzurjmihr.
The king of kings in private to that sage
Related what he had beheld in sleep,
And Buzurjmihr, possessed of all the case,
Considered all the dream from end to end,
And thus replied: ‘‘O king of power supreme !
In truth there is a mystery herein.’

The king said: ‘* Speak the truth because my life
Is failing in my body for suspense.”

Then Buzurjmihr spake thus: ‘ O thou whose

rede

Is higher than moon and sun! this dream have I
Well studied: mark the marvel of its meaning.
From this day forth for forty years and more
Among the Arabs one will rise to power,
Who will adopt the way of righteousness,
And turn aside from all deceit and loss.
He will confound the whole Faith of Zarduhsht.
When he shall show the moon his finger-tip,
His finger will divide it into two,
And none will look upon his back in toil.
The Jew and Christian shall withstand him not,
And he will do away with former Faiths.
He will ascend a triple-footed throne,
And all the world will be advised by him.
When he shall quit this Wayside Hostelry
The treasure of his words will still remain.
The world will joy in him from age to age,
Save the Shah’s palace which the winds will scatter.
When he is dead a scion of thy race
Will have the tymbals, drums, and elephants.
A host will come on him from the Hijaz,
Though unpossessed of arms and equipage,
Will cast him from the throne upon the dust,
And fill the world with warriors. Then will cease

Google

C. 1790
<pb n="68"/>
68 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSTI

The observation of the feast of Sada,
And every Fire-fane be a rubbish heap,
Folk will no longer worship Fire and Sun,
And all the fortunes of the brave will slumber.
Jamasp himself declared before Gushtasp
This secret, giving this interpretation.”’

When Nushirwan heard this from Buzurjmihr
The favour of his countenance was changed ;
He was all day the mate of pain and grief,
And slumbered, when night came, worn out by care.}
Now when three watches of the night had passed
There went up such a panic-stricken cry
That thou hadst said: ‘“‘ The world is all o’er-

turned ! ”’

And then one said: “ The hall is rent in twain ! ”’
Thereat the Shah’s heart started from its place,
And in the uttermost bewilderment
He spake concerning it to Buzurjmihr,
Beginning with the rending of the hall,
Which when the sage had looked upon he spake
On this wise, saying: ‘ O Shah Nushirwan !
This outcry rose by reason of the Sun
That thou beheldest in thy dreams last night.
Know that thy palace gave a cry what time
That moon-like babe was born, and presently
A horseman with two steeds will come to say :—
‘ Fire-worship is abandoned to the blast !’ ”’

Thereat, as swiftly as the flying dust,
A horseman came with tidings: ‘* Even now
Azargashasp is cold ! ”

The Shah’s heart straitened
Because of it; he sighed continually.
Then Buzurjmihr: “O Shah! why mourn there-
for ?

1 Or, with the change of a diacritical point :—
And when the mght came, could not sleep for care.

Google
<pb n="69"/>
NUSHIRWAN 69

What matter this world’s griefs and joys to thee
When thou art gone and parted far by time ? ”
The Shah survived not this event’ for long.
He died: the world bewailed him. Buzurjmihr
Veiled his own visage in the dust within C. 1791
Four se’nnights of the passing of the Shah,
Who left behind this record when he went.
Be thy part to preserve his monument,
For since the turning sky proved so unfair
To him expect no love or justice there.?

And now the crown and throne I decorate
Of Shah Hurmuzd, and seat him on the state.

1 The reign ends here in the original.

Google
<pb n="70"/>
XLII
HURMUZD, THE SON OF NUSHIRWAN

HE REIGNED TWELVE! YEARS

ARGUMENT

Hurmuzd, on succeeding to the throne, makes fair pro-
mises but soon belies them and puts to death his father’s
ministers. Afterwards, perturbed by a prophecy, he re-
pents, and two stories are told of his even-handed justice.
War breaks out and Bahram Chubina comes upon the scene.
He is appointed commander-in-clief and defeats the Turks
under King Sawa and his son Parmuda, but after having
been shamefully insulted by the Shah he rebels—a course
stronyly opposed by his sister Gurdva. He contrives to
make Ifurmuzd suspicious of his own son Khusrau Parwiz
who escapes. Hurmuzd is dethroned and blinded, and
Khusrau Parwiz returns.

NOTE

Hurmuzd (Iformisdas IV., A.D. 578-590) may not have
been so black as he has been painted but his reign, to say
the least of it, stands in melancholy contrast to that of
his father whose precepts he disregarded, whose svstem of
administration he did his best to overturn, whose trusted
ministers he put to death, and whose practice of personally
leading his troops he made no attempt to emulate He
had the good fortune to possess a general at once brave,
able, and apparently quite loyal whom he treated with the
basest and most insolent ingratitude, wrecking his own

' Fourteen according to P. * RSM, p. 473.
70

Google

<pb n="71"/>
HURMUZD 71

reign thereby and inflicting many wounds upon his country.
The romantic history of that general, as told in the Shah-
nama, is one of the finest passages in the poem, and the
poet was fortunate in having such to lay before his readers
as he was nearing the end of his great undertaking."

§2. Ma&kh, the marchlord of Hardt, who seems to have
been known as Khurdasani in accordance to Persian custom
in such matters, appears to be the father of, or identical
with, one of the four compilers of the prose Shéhndma for
Abi Mansur which Firdausi used as his chief authority.
In the Introduction to the present Translation the name
of this particular compiler is given, in accordance to the
text of C., as Taj son of Khuradsani of Hardt? but according
to Noldeke® the Taj is quite uncertain.

§3. Nushirwain had based his system of administration
upon the nobility. We have seen in a characteristic anec-
dote how he refused to consult his own convenience by
accepting a loan of money from a shoemaker.4 Hurmuzd,
not having his father’s ability, found the system irksome
and consequently was inclined to favour the lower at the
expense of the higher orders. Accordingly later on we have
two stories of his even-handed justice.> A justice, how-
ever, which is said to have put to death 13,600 of the nobility
and priesthood, and imprisoned or degraded many others
in the course of a few vears is somewhat suspect.®

Burzmihbr seems to be identical with Buzurjmihr who, we
were told at the end of the last reign,’ died within a month
of Nushirw4n. According to Mas idi Buzurjmibr survived
to be the chief minister of Khusrau Parwiz who after thir-
teen years of reign disgraced him and treated him even
worse than Nushirwan is said to have done on one occasion,®
the two accounts no doubt being variants of the same story.
Firdausi tells us that one of the three scribes was young,®
and that Buzurjmihr was a youth at his lessons when he
first attracted Nushirwan’s attention,'!®© He need not have
been an old man at the time of that Shah’s death. The
probability is, however, that he was executed along with
other ministers by Hurmuzd as the text seems to imply.

1 See p. 96 seq. * Vol. i. p. 67. * NIN, pp. 14 nole15.
‘ p. 48. * p. QI. ‘NT, p. 267.

7 p. 69. *p. 4seg.,MM, ii. 224. ° p. 81,

2° Vol. vii. p. 283. Cf. p. 313.

Google
<pb n="72"/>
72 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

§5. The account in the Shahndma and in Oriental his-
torians of these wars seems much exaggerated. The war
with Ram was nothing new: it had been going on from
the days of Nushirwan and was not specially active at the
moment. The Arab and Khazar invasions require further
confirmation and the latter, it may be suggested, was merely
a patriotic invention to cover up an unfortunate incident
that befell the Persians South of the Caucasus after the con-
clusion of the war with the Turks (p. 76). This last war
has generally been taken to have been waged between the
Persians and the Khan who was a relation by marriage of
Hurmuzd and would be certain to bring great forces into
the field. It appears, however, that Sawa is merely the
Persian form of “ Chao-wou”—the name given in Chinese
official reports of the period to the princes of small states
on the Oxus that were more or less subject to the Khan
who does not appear to have been concerned in the matter
at all.

§6. In the story of Mihran Sitad’s embassave as given
in the Shahnama the prophecy is limited to the outcome
of the marriage of Nushirwan with the Khan‘s daughter.”
It afforded, however, a convenient starting-point for the
Romance that gathered round the heroic personality of
Bahram Chubina and the reference to him was interpolated
accordingly.

§7. Bahram Chubina, whose story and that of his sister
Gurdya extend through the rest of this and far into the
succeeding reign, had been marchlord of Rai and governor
of the North, apparently, under Nushirwan.®> He con-
tinued to hold the same posts under Hurmuzd.4 He was
a native of Rai, sprung from a race of marchlords and army-
chiefs, a Mihran, and is said to have been descended from
Gurgin®—all important indications to the student of the
Shéhnama. Rai was the traditional seat of Arsacid power.®
Shaptr of Rai, an army-chief, who was called in by Kubad
to overthrow Sifarai of the race of Kawa, also was a Mihran
and descended from Mihrak.’ The Mihran clan played an
important part in Sdsdnian times and the name often recurs.8
Gurgin, son of Milad, was the villain of the story of Bizhan

1 NT, p. 269 and notes. RSM, p. 467. * Vol. vii. p. 354.

* ZT, li. 252. Cf. Vol. vii. p. 214. ‘ZT, il. 253.
® ZT, il. 252. * Vol. vi. pp. 201, 215, 223.
* Vol. vil. pp. 185, 192. ° Id.

Google
<pb n="73"/>
HURMUZD =3

and Manizha.t The point is this. The words Milad, Mihrak,
and Mihran are closely allied, probably mere variants, are
reminiscent of Parthian times and under the Sasdnian Dynasty
represent the vanquished Arsacid element.? That element
recovered sufficiently to exercise much political power as
in the case of the Mihrans.

A Ruhham of that stock is said to have been influential
in placing Piriz upon the throne? If they could not be
kings themselves they aspired to be king-makers and
ministers. There was rivalry between them and families of
purer [ranian stock, and the Shahs, as in the instance given
above, availed themselves of it to serve their own ends. Such
rivalrv, however, was a subsidiary matter; the great an-
tagonism between Arsacid and Sasdaman, though latent,
still persisted and is indicated plainly enough in the course
of the story of Bahram Chibina.

Noldeke’s account of that story, which is a blend of history
and romance, is briefly as follows. It was compiled in
Pahlavi shortly before the end of the Sdsinian Dynasty,
about the beginning of the reign of Yazdagird III., A.D.
632, and was translated into Arabic by a certain Jabala
bin Sdlim of whom nothing more is known save that he was
‘the writer of Hisham” who can be no other than the
Arabic historian Hisham Ibn Al-Kalbi. Hisham died
about A.D. 820. The story thus became known to the Muham-
madans and was woven into the general presentment of
Sasdnian history.4 We may add that Tabari, who was
born some eighteen years after Hishim’s death and died
A.D. 923, gives the historical nucleus of the story in
his history. The redactor of his work into Persian (A.D.
963) states that as his Arabic authority has not given the
life of Bahram Chubina in its entirety he gives it from the
book of the history of Persia where he found it more com-
plete.> This version agrees very closely with Firdausi’s.
Both are derived from the Persian Book of Kings in one or
another of its later forms. Which the redactor of Tabari
used we cannot say, but Firdausi, we may assume, used the
modern Persian prose Shahndma of Abd Mansur® for which
a new translation of the story had been made from the

i Vol. Hi. p. 289 seg. * Vol. it. p. tr. vi. 256, vil. 1506.
* Vo Vil, p. 150. “NT, p. 474-
* ZT, ue 253. * See Vol. 1. p. 67.

Google
<pb n="74"/>
74 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

original Pahlavi.! This may account for the difference in
some of the proper names that exists between Firdausi’s
version and that in the Persian Tabarf. In this and some
other respects the latter is of decided help to the under-
standing of the former. Attention will be called to such
matters in subsequent notes.

It is evident that the redactors of the Pahlavi original
into Arabic or Persian took good care to leave little re-
pugnant to Muhammadan Faith or morals. Even the state-
ment in Tabari and its Persian version that Gurdva was the
wife as well as the sister of Bahram Chubina? disappears
in Firdausi.

Yalan-sina—a prominent character in the Romance—is
called Mardanshah in the Persian Tabari. He was the
brother® and a firm supporter of Bahram Chubina. Ancther
brother—Gurdwi—took the opposite side and remained
loyal to Khusrau Parwiz. The sympathies of Gurdya,
Bahram Chubina‘s sister, though she associated with him
till his death, were also legitimist.

§8. Here we have another instance of a Mihran in high
oftice.4 Probably he was the successor of [zid Gashasp,
the scribe, who had been put to death by Hurmuzd early
in his reign® and is to be carefully distinguished from the
general of the same name in Bahram Chtbina’s army, which
is not always done in the text of C.®

In the Persian Tabari the purvevor of sheep's heads 1s
said to have been naked and Bahram Chubina to have
speared two of the heads one of which fell back into the
tray. The interpretation was that he would have to deal
with two kings of whom one would be killed while the other
would be restored to his royalty. The nudity signified that
Bahram Chubina would revolt.’

According to the Persian Tabari, Hurmuzd, on hearing of
the invasion of Sawa Shah, sent Kharrdd, sun of Barzin,
with an escort to him to delay his advance while the ex-
pedition under the command of Bahram Chubina was being
got ready. The envoy managed to keep Sawa at Balkh
for a whole year.®

Faghfur, or Faghfur of Chin, hitherto in the Shahnama a

‘NT, p. 475. "NT, p. 279. ZT, ii. 303.
* NT, p. 478. ‘Cf. p. 72. +p. 83.
* Cf. pp. 75, 150 note, 158 no’e. 7 ZT, ii. 258. * Id. 259.

Google
<pb n="75"/>
HURMUZD +5

dynastic title, here appears as the name of the vounger son
of Sawa perhaps to add to the latter's importance. In the
Persian Tabari the governor of Khurasan takes the part
here played by Faghfur.!

§12. In the Persian Tabarf Bahram Chubina has the
dream while dozing on horseback after having been engaged
in arraying the troops all might, and in the same authority
bars the road of retreat with five hundred horse,? while the
only sorcery is in connexion with the dream.

According to Tabari® the shot that slew king Sawa was one
of three that gave renown to archers in Persian story. The
others were that of Arish* and that of Sufaraf who in the
war undertaken to avenge Piraz shot at a chief in the van-
guard of Khushnawaz and pierced his horse’s head with an
arrow. The chief was taken prisoner by Sutfarat who sent
him back to Khushnawadz with instructions to report the
matter, and Khushnawaz was so impressed that he sued
for peace.© Neither of these instances 1s mentioned in the
Shahndma though it celebrates in a famous passaye Rustam’s
shot in the fight with Ashkabus® and Bahram Gur’s skill
in archery.’

Bahram, the son of Sivawush, had married a niece of
Bahram Chubina.§

§ 14. The episode of the garden is not in the Persian Tabari.

§17. The above remark applies to the quarrel between
Bahram Chubina and Parmida, and to the former’s retention
of some of the booty.

The Persian Tabarf makes Marddnshah (Yalan-sina), not
[zid Gashasp, conduct the Khan, the other prisoners, and the
booty to [ran.®

§ 18. The Shahndma here seems to confuse [zid Gashasp
with the scribe of that name executed by Hurmuzd.!° It is
clear from the Persian Tabari! that the person consulted by
the Shah about Bahram Chubina was his confidant and
minister Ayin Gashasp who in the Persian Tabari is named
Yazdaénbakhsh. f[zid and Yazdén both mean God which also
caused confusion and when it became hopeless the form Ayin
Gashasp was adopted to get out of the difficulty.

1 Id. * Id. 261. * NT. p. 271.

‘ See Vol. v. p. rz. ‘NT, p. 127. ZT, it. 143.
* Vol. ili. pp. 109, 181. 7 Vol. vi. 383, Vil. 54, 55, 80-
*ZT, i. 262. Cf. NT, 281, 282 nole. ° ZT. il. pp. 265, 2006.

1° p. 83. "ZT. A. p. 20%,

Google
<pb n="76"/>
76 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

§§ 19-21. The definite accusation of withholding some
of the booty made by the archscribe (Mihran) against Bahram
Chubina ts absent in the Persian Tabari which merely gives
the vague Insinuation of the minister Yazdanbaksh which
rouses suspicion in Hurmuzd’s mind and causes him to send
Mardanshah back to the commander-in-chief with a chain,
distaff-case and cotton, and an insulting letter.) A similar
insult is recorded to have been offered by the Empress Sophia
to the exarch Narses when he was superseded and bidden
return to his place among the maidens of the palace where a
distaff should again be placed in his hand?

The treatment of Bahram Chubina by Hurmuzd, though
foolish enough in any circumstances, was not quite so un-
reasonable and motiveless as it appears to be in the accounts
of oriental writers. In A.D. 589 after the successful conclusion
of Bahram Chubina’s expedition Hurmuzd conceived the
idea of renewing the Lazic war which his father had abandoned
in A.D. 562,3 and sent Bahram Chubina to conduct the cam-
paign. That chief, however, was defeated by the Romans
in a battle on the Araxes and his disgrace followed.4

§ 22. Here for once the Shahnama seems to join hands
with Western Romance. The Adventure, mutatis mutand?s,
reads as if it had been taken bodily from some medieval
romance of chivalry.

According to the Persian Tabari both Kharrdd, son of
Barzin, and the archscribe were present on the occasion.§

§ 23. Here again there seems to be some confusion in
connexion with [zid Gashasp. He is identified with the
archscribe in the heading. Moreover he is pursued, captured,
and brought back to Bahram Chubina, who lets him off very
easily, because he is wanted for service with that paladin. In
the Persian Tabari both the fugitives make good their escape
to Hurmuzd.6 That version does not know of [zid Gashasp,
who is mentioned, however, in Tabari.*

§ 24. In the Persian Tabari Bahram Chubina sends Hur-
muzd twelve thousand hangers with bent points to represent
all his twelve thousand troops.®

Bahram Chubina is here described as the son of Gashasp.

‘Id. * GDF, v. 336.

7 Vol vil, p. 215. ‘NT, p. 272 nofe. KRSM, p. 469
‘ZT, ue 267. * Id. 208.

"NT, p. 278 * ZT, i. 267.
<pb n="77"/>
HURMUZD 77

Tabarf makes him the son of Bahrém-Gushnasp,! the Persian
version of Bahram,? and Mas’udi of the nickname—Chutbin.$

§ 25. [zid Gashasp is regarded as dealing with both sides
because of the malicious speech that he is represented to
have made about Bahram Chubina.4

The debate is not in the Persian Tabarf.

§ 26. The letter to the Khan is not in the Persian Tabari.

Historically Bahram Chubina issued coins in his own name
but apparently not in that of Khusrau Parwiz.®

§ 27. The authorities differ as to whether Gustaham was
imprisoned as well as Bandwi. The Oriental say both, the
Greek Bandwi only,® which makes the revolt more intelligible.

§1
The Prelude

The Summer’ mocked the ruddy apple-tree,
And treated fruit and leaf with raillery :-—
‘* As for the posy that in Spring of late
Thou barest on thy breast intoxicate,
With just a blush remembered in its bloom,
And branches yielding exquisite perfume,
How didst thou find a purchaser to buy,
And do thy marketing so readily ?
Those emeralds and rubies who bestowed
On thee that bendest underneath the load ?
Sooth! thou hast bartered blossom for the grace
Of colour wherewithal to deck thy face,®
But brought me to despair who cannot see
Thy blossoms for thy flaunting bravery.”
Sweet Spring, my charmer! whither hast thou fled,
1 NT, p. 270. * ZT, il. 252.
> MM, li. 213. Cf. p. 98 note. ‘ p. 150 and nofe.
* RSM, p. 471 nole. «Id.

* Tamuz, the Syrian month of July, in the original.
* Three couplets omitted.

Google
<pb n="78"/>
C. 1702

78 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And left the glories of the garden dead ?
Howbeit Autumn hath a scent of thine,

And I will drink to thee in new-made wine ;
Though thou art sallow I will praise thee yet,
And deck thee like Hurmuzd’s own coronet,
For now my mart is brisk. Art thou to see,
When I am dead and gone, no trace of me ?!

§ 2
How Hurmuzd ascended the Throne and harangued
the Chiefs

A marchlord of Harat, well shot in age,
There was, in all approven and beseen,
A ready speaker, Makh by name, world-sage,
Still flourishing and of exalted mien ;
And it was him I questioned fain to find
What record of Hurmuzd he had in mind
When that Shah filled the throne of equity :
That eld of Khurasan thus answered me :—
Whenas that Shah sat on the famous state
He first gave praises to almighty God,
The Arbiter of fortune, and then said :—
“We will renown the throne and hold in honour
The men of high degree. We will enfold
The world beneath our wings, as did our sire,
In goodly case and Glory. We will make
Offenders quake and ease the oppressed, be patient
If one doth ill and succour him in trouble.
The prop of majesty 1s clemency
With bounty, justice, and right conduct. Know
That good and evil never are concealed

' Division of text as in P.

Google
<pb n="79"/>
HURMUZD

From Him who is the Maker of the world.

Our ancestors—crown-wearers in their time,
Which through their justice had its share of praise—
Sought but for mildness, equity, and greatness,
With valour, aptitude, their lieges’ service,

Their lords’ observance, and to vex their foes.

In every clime to act and to command,

Power, counsel, and authority to treat,

Are mine. The good affect a heaven-sent Shah.
Now mercy is the capital of such ;

The age becometh full of ease through bounty.
The mendicants will I entreat with kindness,

And will watch o’er the rich. The self-made man
Shall have a prosperous commerce with ourselves.
Withhold not your desires from my fond heart ;

I will abate with ease whatever cause

For fear ye entertain. Ye prosperous !

Joy in my crown and throne. Amid the great
Mine is the lustre in that mercy, justice,

And bounty are mine own. Grow still in kindness,
And banish greed and vengeance from your hearts.
They that fear God will see not evil fortune,

So strive ye all, both small and great, to win

The favour of the Maker of the world.

Again, let not the heart of one possessed

Of wisdom contemplate ingratitude,

And when thou benefitest other folk

Let there be no idea of recompense.

Mix not with men that speak deceitfully,

For what they utter is for outward show,

And if thy king be just think thou no shame
Concerning him, for while thou callest him
Unwise he may be studious of the words

Of former Shahs,} and when his heart is prompted
To mercy sow not thou the seed of guile

' Reading with P.

Google
<pb n="80"/>
C. 1793

80 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Upon the earth. The spurner of our counsel

Will throw away the benefits of fortune.

The approval of thy Shah sufficeth thee,

While to resist him is the road to ruin.

His harshness in exhorting thee is kind,

For he would break with thee if he were wroth.

Bepgrudge no efforts in the cause of good,

And joy not in injustice and in wealth.

When in the world thou hast thy heart’s desire,

And reached what thou wast instant to attain,

Still, when thou don’st the crown of seventy vears,

Thou yieldest all thy winnings to the foe.

My heart is greatly troubled for the poor,

And I would have them ever in my thoughts.

I ask the holy Fosterer for time

To render poor folk happy with my treasures ;

I will not bring the saintly heart to trouble.

If any by his monetary wealth

Shall grow too kinglike him will I abase :

No rival will I have. From first to last,

In public utterance and secret thought,

We are the same. The Maker’s benison

Be yours, your earth the circling vault of heaven.”’
Now when the assembly heard his words each man

Grew thoughtful, those of wealth were filled with

fear,
And tyrants’ hearts were rent, while for their part
The sage and mendicant waxed glad of heart.

Google

eo EE, aka eek

one

>
_—

—~ Ow) ere gee se oe oe p< enews

tw ro 2

iit J

| Neer

ie
<pb n="81"/>
HURMUZD 81

§3
How Hurmuzd slew f[zid Gashasp, Zarduhsht,
Simadh Barzin and Bahrdm Azarmihdan, his
Father's Ministers)

The Shah ruled well until he felt secure

And had attained his ends but then he raged,
Displayed his evil nature, left the path

Of right and, as he had determined, slew
Those most in honour with his father—men,
Who, innocent and happy, feared no ill.

Among the scribes of Nushirwan were three,
Two old, one young, their names Izid Gashasp,
Burzmihr—a learnéd scribe of Grace and presence—
And Mah Azar, wise, shrewd, and prosperous.
The three had been vizirs and ministers
Before the throne of Nushirwan. Hurmuzd
Was longing to bring ruin on all three
Because he feared that they might prove ingrate.
Without a cause he raised his hand against
Izid Gashasp, bound and imprisoned him.

The high priest’s heart was straitened and his cheek
Wan with anxiety, for he was good,
An ancient named Zarduhsht, and at the bondage
Of scribe [zid Gashasp it was as though
His own heart had been arrow-pierced.

. Now when
Izid Gashasp had passed a day untended,
Without food, clothes or solacer, a friend
Conveyed for him this message from the prison
To the high priest: “O thou that to the captive
Art skin and marrow! here am I within

1 The heading in the original seems to have been carelessly com-
piled. The one above has been adopted to suit the account in the
text.

VOL. VIII. F

Google

C. 1794
<pb n="82"/>
82 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

The prison of the Shah without attendance,
And none can come to me. I crave for food ;
A famished paunch increaseth my distress.
Send to me what is fit and, when I die,

Some linen! and a stitcher for my shroud.”’

The high priest’s heart was grieved at his afflic-

tion,
His message, place, and lodging. He replied :—
‘** Complain not of the matter of thy bondage
If thou art not in jeopardy of life.”’

Albeit the message left him broken-hearted,
And troubled for himself. He thought: “ Ifnews .
Shall reach this Graceless and ungenerous Shah
That his high priest hath sent things to the prison,
My life and body are not worth a mite;

This world-lord will destroy me and will turn
A livid face toward me in his wrath.”’
Yet through affection for Izid Gashasp,
The scribe, his heart was wrung, his face like gall.
He bade his heedful cook take to the prison
Food for the prisoner and afterwards
Gat on an Arab steed and went to him.
The keeper of the prison paled with fright,
On seeing the high priest, but dared not say :—
“*Go not within the prison for this king
Is self-willed and a novice.”
- Bathed in tears
That agéd man alighted from his steed,
And visited Izid Gashasp. They clasped
Each other in a close embrace, all anguish,
The lashes of their eyes like clouds in Spring,
And held talk of the Shah’s malignity
Until words failed them. Then the board was
spread
Before those holy men who next began

1 Reading with P.

Google
<pb n="83"/>
HURMUZD 83

To mutter prayers with sacred twigs in hand,
And afterwards Izid Gashasp in whispers
Conveyed his wishes, while the high priest heark-
ened,
As to his hoarded treasure and dinars,
His mansions, palaces, and property,
And said: ‘*O noble man! on going hence
Say to Hurmuzd from me: * Though thou mayst
spurn
My words yet think upon the toils and care
That I supported with Shah Nushirwan,
And how I cherished thee too on my breast.
My recompense is chains and fear of worse,
And I shall show God on the Judgment Day
A guiltless heart aggrieved against the king.’ ”’
Now when the high priest had gone home a spy
Departed hastily and told the news
To Shah Hurmuzd whose heart conceived fell
schemes.
He did not spare Izid Gashasp but sent,
And slew him in the prison, heard reports
At large about the high priest, made no sign,
And pondered how by fair means or by foul
To slay him ; then gave orders to the cook
To mingle bane in secret with some dish,
And when the high priest came at audience-time
To pay his duty to the illustrious king,
Hurmuzd said: “ Tarry here to-day for I
Have a new cook.”’
The high priest sat; they spread
The board ; he paled; he felt that ’twas his last,
And soit proved. The cooks brought up the meats,
And Shah Hurmuzd partook of all in turn,
But when he had the poisoned dish brought in
The high priest glanced thereat and looked again.
There was an ill surmise in his pure heart :—

Google

C. 1795
<pb n="84"/>
& 4 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

* His remedy is poison in that dish!”

Hurmuzd, on seeing this, said not a word,
But stretched his hand out to that dish of bane,
And, in accordance to the use of kings
When paving servants honour and regard,
Put his own noble fingers to the board,
And, having taken marrow from the dish,
said to the high priest: “*O thou honest man!
I made this luscious morsel for thyself,
So open wide thy mouth and take this food,
And such should be thy nourishment henceforth.”

The archmage answered : “ By thy life and head,
And may thy head and crown endure for ever,
Bid me not eat it; I have had enough,?
So do not press me further.”’

Said Hurmuzd :—
‘** By sun and moon, and by the purity
Of soul of him who is the Shah and world-lord,
Thou shalt accept this morsel from my hand,
And frustrate not my wish herein.”
He answered :—

** The Shah hath bidden and I have no choice.”’

He ate, then left the board, in sore distress,

C. 1746 And hurried home, spake of the poisoned food
To none but spread a robe and lay lamenting.
He ordered one to fetch an antidote
From those old hoards of his or from the city,
But it availed not aught, and bitterly
Complained he unto God against Hurmuzd.

The Shah dispatched a trusty man to learn

The high priest’s state, the action of the poison,

And if the scheme had failed. Now when the
eye

Of the high priest beheld the messenger

Tears fell from his eyelashes down his cheeks.

‘Reading with P.

Google
<pb n="85"/>
HURMUZD 85

““Go, tell Hurmuzd,” he said: ‘Thy fortune
changeth.

Hereafter, through thy mischievous designs,

Thou shalt be blind and shiftless in the world,

Thy foes shall have their hearts’ desire upon thee,

And lasting shame shall dog thy soul for this.

Soon wilt thou die and leave an evil name.

I go to lay my cause before the Judge,

Where we shall face each other. Never more

Sleep free from ill, for chastisement divine

Confronteth thee. I take my leave of thee,

Malignant man! _ Ill done will bring thee ill.’ ”’

The trusty envoy heard and went with tears

To take the king the message. He repented,

Writhed at the high priest’s righteous words but
saw

No way to cure that smart and deeply sighed.

Anon the high priest died, and all the wise

Wept o’er him sorely. In this world of pain

And toil why court renown and clutch at gain ?

The wise count breaths because no joys remain.

The high priest’s wretched end convulsed the realm

With grief, but that blood-shedding, brutal world-
lord

Recked not of evil fortune, girt his loins

For bloodshed, made Bahram Azarmihan

His tool, called him by night and made him kneel

Beside the throne, then said: ‘‘ Thou wouldst feel
safe

From evil treatment at my hands? Then when

The sun is bright in heaven, and mountain-tops

Are shining like a back-plate, come among

The nobles of fran and take thy stand

Before my throne. Then will I question thee

About Simah Barzin: make answer boldly.

I shall inquire: ‘ What is this friend of thine,

Google
<pb n="86"/>
86 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

An evil man or one that serveth God ?’
C. 1797 Reply: ‘ He is an evil man, a villain,

And sprung from Ahriman.’ Then ask whatever
Thou wilt—a handmaid, signet, throne and crown.”’

Bahram replied: “ I will, and multiply
The ill a hundredfold.”’

The Shah thus sought
An artifice to put Simah Barzin,
One of the chiefs, beloved by Nushirwan—
That Lustre of the age—beyond the pale
Of sympathy.
Now when the Robe whose hue

Is ivory-bright grew visible, and Sol
Rose in the Sign of Gemini, the world-lord
Sat on the ivory throne, and o’er his head
They hung the costly crown. The [rdnian chiefs
Met and drew up in rank before the court-gate.
The audience-chamberlain withdrew the curtain,
And all the throng approached the king. First came
Bahram Azarmihan, Simah Barzin,
And valiant chiefs. Each took his proper seat,
The crowd still standing in the monarch’s presence,
Who questioned thus Bahram Azarmihan :—
‘** Now doth Simah Barzin, in presence here,
Deserve our wealth or is he troublesome,
Because the ill-disposed deserve not treasure ?”’

Bahram Azarmihan well understood
The question of the monarch of the world,
Its base and motive: °‘ We must weep therefor,
And from the ruler of the people I
Shall have at last a charnel but no shroud ! ”
And thus he made response: “O noble Shah!
Look for no goodness from Simah Barzin,
For he hath wrecked fran. Would that his body
Had neither brain nor skin! He speaketh naught
But villainy and thus produceth strife.”’

Google
<pb n="87"/>
HURMUZD 87

Simah Barzin, on hearing this, replied :—
‘** My good old friend ! defame not thus my person,
And be not thus confederate with the Div.
Since thou hast been my friend what words and
deeds
Of Ahriman hast thou perceived in me ? ”
Bahr4m Azarmihan thus answered him :—
“Thou hast been scattering seed throughout the
world,
And thou wilt be the first to reap the crop.
Black smoke shall be thy portion of the fire,
For Nushirwan once summoned thee and me,
And made us kneel before the royal throne
With the high priest, Burzmihr, and with that chief .
Of comely face, Izid Gashasp, and asked :—
* Who doth deserve the imperial throne and who
Possesseth Grace ? On younger son or elder
Shall I bestow it ? Which is worthier
Of kingship ?’
Then the rest of us arose,
And framed our tongues to utter this reply :—
* This man of Turkman kindred is unworthy ;
None would give aught for such a Shah, for he
Is Khan-descended, is of evil nature,
And like his mother both in looks and bearing.’
Thou saidst: *‘ Hurmuzd is fit to be the Shah,’
And now art guilty of the consequence.
For this cause have I testified against thee,
And opened thus my lips in thy dispraise.”’
Hurmuzd at that archmage’s truthful words
Turned pale with shame. At night he sent them
both
To prison and for two nights made no sign
Withal, but on the third, what time the moon
Arose above the mountains, he dispatched
Simah Barzin by slaying him within

Google

C. 1798
<pb n="88"/>
88 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI!I

The prison of the thieves yet gat thereby

But toil and malison. On hearing how

That man of honest heart had passed away
Bahram Azarmihan sent to the Shah

A message saying: “ Thou whose crown Is over
The orbit of the moon! thou knowest how much
I have endured to keep thy secrets close,

And ne’er was aught but well disposed to thee
Before thy father, that illustrious Shah.

If thou wilt summon me and make me sit
Beside the royal throne I will reveal

A matter to thee in thine interest.

Free me at once from bondage in the prison ;
’Twill help Iran and keep the wise unscathed.”’

Hurmuzd, when this came, chose a confidant
To bring Bahram Azarmihan to him,

And to that court renowned. The monarch sum-
moned

Bahram Azarmihan when it was night,

Caused him to kneel before the royal throne,

And then said: “ Tell me what this matter is

That will secure my life in happiness.”

He answered: “ In the royal treasury
I have observed a plain black cabinet.
Deposited within it is a casket,

And therein is a document in Persian.

’Tis written on white silk: the Iranians’ hopes

Are centred there. ’Twas written by thy sire,

That Shah and world-lord, and thou shouldest see
it.”

Then to his treasurer, good at need, Hurmuzd
Sent one to say: “ Seek in the ancient hoards
A plain sealed cabinet and on the seal
The name of Nushirwan, and may his soul
Be ever young! Dispatch and bring it me
Ere night be past.”

Google
<pb n="89"/>
HURMUZD &y

The treasurer was prompt,
And brought it with the seal intact. The world-
lord
Oped it, invoking oftentimes the while
The name of Nushirwan. He saw within
A casket, which was also sealed, wherefrom
He eagerly took forth the piece of silk,
And saw the characters of Nushirwan
Inscribed thereon, and thus the writing ran :—

** Hurmuzd for two years more than ten
Will prove a matchless monarch, then
The world will be convulsed, his name
Pass to abeyance with his fame.

Foes will spring up in every place
Led by a man of evil race,

An Ahriman, the monarch’s host
Will be dispersed, his throne be lost.
Him will that villain blind, and they
Will, after, take his life away. °”’

On seeing that script, and in his father’s hand,
Hurmuzd was frayed and rent the silk asunder.
With bloodshot eyes and livid face he cried :—

‘** Injurious man! what was thine aim herein ?
Wouldst have my head ? ”’

Bahram Azarmihan
Said: ‘“ Turkman-born! how long wilt thou delight
In bloodshed ? From the Khan, not Kai Kubad,
Art thou upon whose head the crown was set
By Nushirwan.”

Hurmuzd knew: “If he can

He will o’erthrow me,”’ heard out his abuse,
And sent him back to prison where next nicht,
1 More literally :—

‘‘ The enemy will cast him down from the throne.”
* Reading with P.

Google

- 1799
<pb n="90"/>
go THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

What time the moon rose o’er the mountain-tops,
The deathsman slew him. At the court no sage
Or counsellor or archimage was left.

From 1ll self-governance all evils spring ;

See that thou disregard that evil thing.

§ 4
How Hurmuzd turned from Tyranny to Justice

From that time forth he led a goodlier life,
Moved by remorse at heart. Now every year,
When nights were short, he sojourned at Istakhr
Two months because that city was delightsome,
The air serene: he knew not how to quit it.
He and his court were wont to spend three months
At Ispahan with its delicious air—
The seat of mighty men. In Winter-time
He dwelt at Taisafun among the troops,
The archimages and the counsellors ;
While in the Spring he was upon the plain
Of the Arwand, and thus a while went by.

C. 1800 His heart was terror-stricken by that scroll,
He spent three watches of the night in prayer,
Shed no more blood thenceforth and did no wrong :
His soul mused not of ill. Whene’er the Veil
Of lapis-lazuli was hidden, and when
The topaz height appeared, a herald used
Thus to proclaim: “* Famed men of Grace and pru-

dence !

If tilth be trampled and the sower troubled
By that mishap, or if a horse shall enter
Crops, or if any one withal shall trespass
On orchards, then the horse’s tail and ears
Must be cut off and the thief's head be set

Google
<pb n="91"/>
HURMUZD gt

Upon the stake.’’?
He had a son beloved,
Just like the moon, whom he had named Parwiz,
And sometimes called *“* Khusrau the well-content.’’?
He never left his father’s side for long ;
The father never bloomed without the son.
It chanced that the young steed of prince Parwiz
Escaped from stall and followed by its groom
Went to the growing crops whose owner came
Lamenting to the groom and asked: “ What man
Must sorrow for this horse’s ears and tail ? ”’
The groom said: ‘“’Tis the horse of prince
Parwiz ;
What careth he for subjects ? ”’
Then the owner
Went to the king and laid the case before him,
Who said: ‘* Haste, dock the horse’s tail and ears,
Then have the damage to the crop assessed,
And prince Khusrau shall recompense the man
A hundredfold in money from his treasures
Upon the field and in its owner’s presence.”
Thereat the prince moved chiefs to plead for him
Before the Shah that he would not have docked
The black steed’s tail and ears, but in his wrath
Against the steed the king paid no regard
To all those men of world-experience ;
The groom through terror of the king made haste
To dock the young steed of its ears and tail
Upon that tilth betrampled ; and Khusrau
Paid the complainant what the Shah had bidden.
Anon the king went hunting, and they all
Had much good sport. <A valiant warrior,
Whose father was the captain of the host,
Saw, as he went along, a vine well laden

' Two couplets omitted.
* The prince afterwards famous as Shah Nhusrau Parwiz.

Google

C. 1801
<pb n="92"/>
92 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

With unripe grapes and bade his servant haste
To cut and take some bunches to his cook.
The owner came and said: ‘‘ Thou miscreant !
Thou neither wast the tender of this vine,

Nor boughtest it with treasure and dinars !
Why hast thou spoiled the labour of another ?
I shall complain of thee before the Shah.”’

The valiant horseman, fearing what might chance,
Undid his belt forthwith and then bestowed it,
All costly and all golden with each link
Inlaid with gems, upon the man who said
On seeing it: “* What wrong one must condone !
Tell not the king. Thou hast no purchaser
In me, so make it no affair of price ;

While as for thanks I lay on thee that word ;
Thou wouldst be lifeless if that just judge heard ! ’*!

§5

How Hosts gathered from all Sides against Hurmuczd,
and how he took Counsel with his Wazirs

When he had reigned for ten years righteously
The voice of foemen rose from every realm,
King Sawa marched upon him from Harat
With drums and treasure, elephants and troops.
If thou wouldst take the number of that host
Go count four hundred o’er a thousand times.
There were twelve hundred elephants of war ;
Thou wouldst have said: “ Earth hath no room
for them.”
The desert from Harat to the Marvrud?
Was thick as warp and woof with soldiery,

1 Six couplets omitted. * Reading with P.

Google
<pb n="93"/>
HURMUZD 93

And as he led them on to Marv the earth
Was hidden by the dust-clouds of the host.

King Sawa wrote a letter to Hurmuzd,
And said: “‘ Convoke thy powers from every side,
Repair the roads and bridges for my troops,
Get provand and bethink thee of my sword.
I would pass through thy realm. Mine army reacheth
O’er river, height, and waste.”

On reading this

The king turned pale at all that countless host.
Then from another quarter Cesar came,
And over-ran the land with his array—
A force of Rumans five score thousand strong,
Courageous and redoubted cavaliers.
The cities ta’en by Nushirwan, whose name
Still frighted him, he took back with the sword :
All were again obedient unto Cesar.}
A host came from the side of the Khazars,
And all the fields and fells were black with them.
A warrior of experience and possessed
Of troops and treasure of his own was leader,
And from Armenia their companies
Extended to the gate of Ardabil.
Then from the waste of spear-armed cavaliers
An army came past count. “Abbas and ‘Amr,
Two horsemen youthful and illustrious,
‘Led them. They gave to havoc land and crop
Because Hurmuzd demanded tribute of them.
That host reached the Farat, and in that land
No place for grass was left. When fortune loured
News reached Hurmuzd, and that successful Shah
Grew all amort at his informants’ words,
And he repented slaying those archmages,
And alienating wise men from his court.
He saw no counsellor, and he had need

* Couplet inserted from P. and one omitted.

Google

C. 1802
<pb n="94"/>
C. 1803

94 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Of wise advisers, so he sent and summoned
The frdnians to full session in the palace,
And made discovery of all the matter,
Addressing thus those nobles of the land :—
‘“* A greater host than any can recall
Is marching on fran.”
Then all the marchlords
Approached him with suggestions, saying thus :—
‘* Advised and prudent Shah! hear us herein.
Thou art a wise Shah; we are subjects merely,
And count ourselves as less than one archmage.
Thy scribes and thine archmages hast thou slain,
Departing from both faith and precedent.
Think what to do and who shall guard our land.”’
Then said an archimage who was wazir :—
“*O sage and knowledge-seeking Shah! if now
The host of the Khazars come forth to battle
Our warriors will be fully occupied.
Let us make overtures to them of Rum,
And then pluck up the Arabs by the root.
King Sawa is more instant and with him
Our prospect is more gloomy too. Our trouble
Will come by way of Khurasan for he
Will waste our country and our wealth withal ;
So when the Turkman marcheth from Jihun
To war there must be no delay.”
Hurmuzd,
For he was seeking for a policy,
Said to that archimage: ‘“‘ How shall we now
Bear us toward king Sawa ?”’
He replied :—
** Put thine own soldiers into war-array,
For troops exalt a monarch. Summon too
The muster-master that he may account
The number fit for service.”

1 “ tes vaillantes troupes n’hésiteront pas un instant.’ Mobhl.

Google
<pb n="95"/>
HURMUZD 95

With the roll

The muster-master came before the Shah,
Whose army numbered five score thousand men,
The more part mounted, many were on foot.

The archmage said: ‘‘ With such a host as this
We well may be defeated by king Sawa
Unless thou actest boldly and uprightly,
Dismissing all ideas of fraud and falsehood ;
Then thou wilt free thy subjects’ heads from bonds
As well becometh kingship. Thou hast heard
The mighty tale of ill done to Gushtasp,
And to Luhrasp all for religion’s sake
By great Arjasp, that brave old Wolf, and all
The cavaliers of Chin, the woe of Balkh,
And how life was embittered in that land
Until Asfandiyar was set at large,
And pressed the war amain.!_ Unless the king
Of earth will be advised he will behold
Much trouble from the Turks of Chin, but though
I pass the king in years I pass him not
In thought.”

The king said: ‘* Cesar shall not fight

With us. I will restore the cities taken
By Nushirwan, and then he will withdraw.”

He chose a scribe—a warrior—as envoy,
A wise, a prudent, and observant man,
And sent him unto Cesar with this message :—
‘**T want no Riman cities; be that land
Thine ; but withal set foot not on our coasts
If thou wouldst be both great and prosperous.”’

The envoy came to Cesar and delivered
The message of Hurmuzd. The lord of Rim
Withdrew and did no scath upon [ran.
The king, when Cesar had withdrawn, prepared
To war with the Khazars. He formed a host,

1 See Vol. v. p. 35 seq.

Google
<pb n="96"/>
C. 1804

96 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Whose dust-clouds blotted day, and sent it thither

To fire those fields and fells, led by Kharrad—

A man of Grace, of worship, and of justice.

Now when that army reached Armenia

The host of the Khazars barred all the way.

The [rdnians slaughtered many and bare off

Much spoil. The Arabs hearing this were checked,

And went back whence they came. So when the
Shah

Heard that Kharrad had been victorious

Naught but to fight king Sawa still remained,
To which endeavour all his thoughts were strained.

§ 6

How Hurmuzd heard of Bahram Chibtna and sent
for him

A servant of the Shah’s, one hight Nastuh,
A wise, successful, and observant man,
Spake thus: “O Shah! be happy. May the hand
Of ill be ever far from thee! My sire,
The wise Mihran Sitad, hath still his wits,
Though old, and sitteth with the Zandavasta
In his retirement, having naught to hope for
Through age and weakness. Now but recently
I went and spent a day and night with him,
Told him about king Sawa, his vast host,
And elephants of war. My father said :—
‘ The ancient prophecy is then fulfilled ! ’
I questioned him: ‘ To what referrest thou ? ’
He answered: ‘ If the Shah shall ask of me
I will reveal it.’ ”

Then the king of kings

Google
<pb n="97"/>
HURMUZD 97

Commanded that a noble should set forth
In haste and fetch the old man from his palace
Upon a litter. When that ancient came,
His heart all knowledge and his head all lore,
Before the Shah, Hurmuzd inquired of him :—
‘** What know’st thou of the past ? ”’

**O fluent Shah,
And heedful,” said the elder, ‘‘ when the Khan
Dispatched thy mother to [ran from Chin
I was the chief of eight score warriors
That went to ask of him her hand in marriage.
Thy father, that most upright king of kings,
Demanded no slave’s daughter of the Khan,
But said: * Require a daughter of the queen ;
No slave must be the consort of the Shah.’
I went before the Khan and did obeisance.
He had five daughters in his women’s bower,
All goodly, fit to deck the thrones of monarchs,
In gait like pheasants and in looks lke Spring,
And all fulfilled with colour, scent, and beauty.
The monarch sent me to their bower. I entered
That famed court. They had decked the daughters’

faces,

And twined their locks with roses, save thy mother
Who wore no coronet, no necklace, bracelet,
Or other ornament but sat there mute
With hanging head and shyly hid her face
Behind her sleeves; but she alone of all
Was daughter of the queen; none of the rest
Possessed such elegance, such bloom, and charm
Because the queen was daughter of Faghfur,
And naturally indisposed to ill.
She sorrowed that her child should dwell afar,
And that pure daughter quit the monarch’s palace.
Among those daughters her it was I chose ;
I heeded not the others. Said the Khan :—

VOL. VIII. G

Google

C. 1805
<pb n="98"/>
C. 1806

98 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

‘Select another; all the five are fair

And worshipful,’ and this was my response :—

“My choice is made; to choose again were fatal.’

Then summoned he his priests and made them kneel

Before the royal throne and asked concerning

His daughter’s future. Those astrologers

Replied: ‘Thou shalt see naught but good and
hear

Naught but the truth. From her and from the
Shéh

A prince like some fierce lion will be born,

Of lofty stature and with lusty limbs,

Brave as a lion, bounteous as a cloud,

Black-eyed, impetuous, and choleric,

Who, on his father’s death, will be the king.

He will enjoy much treasure from his sire,

And in his latter days refrain from evil.

Thereafter will a mighty king arise,

Lead forth a valiant host of Turks and seek

With that array to occupy Iran

And country of Yaman throughout. The Shah

Will be in dudgeon at him and will fear

His high, victorious fortune, but will have

Far off a subject, an exalted horseman

And loyal liege, tall and adust of body,

Upon his head crisp locks as black as musk,

Big both of bone and nose and swart of skin—

A warrior brave and strong, nicknamed Chubina,}

And sprung from paladins. This strenuous man

Will come with some few soldiers to the Shah,

Soon overthrow this Turk and wreck his host.’

Ne’er saw I one more glad than was the Khan

On hearing this. He gave the Crown of all

His daughters unto Nushirwan while I

Received her on the Shah's behalf. This done

1 t.e., Stick-like.

Google
<pb n="99"/>
HURMUZD gy

I hied me home, the Khan producing for us
Such wealth of jewels from his treasury
That we were put to it to carry them.
He came with me as far as the Jfhun,
Embarked his daughter and with doleful heart
Turned back, at one with sorrow for his child.
Now have I told my tale here in thy presence,
O king of men! Seek for the man himself
Within thy realm and bid thy couriers haste
Because thy triumph lieth in his hands,
But tell not friend or foe.”
E’en with the words
He yielded up the ghost, and all the folk
Bewailed him bitterly. The king of kings
Was all astound and poured down tears of blood.
‘‘ Mihran Sitdd,”? he told the Iranians,
‘* Retained this story in his memory,
And after having told it to us died,
Committing his accepted soul to God,
And God be thanked that this old man hath uttered
Words of such import. Had I fetched him hither
But one hour later he had died and I
Had seen much grief. Our realm must now be
searched

For this man whether he be lord or liege.
Seek indefatigably for this one
Until ye find him.”

An illustrious subject,
The master of the horse, named Zaéd Farrukh,
Who sought in all the pleasure of the Shah,
Went to him and thus spake: “ The indications
Detailed by that famed man before the lords
Can only, otherwise we clutch but wind,
Apply, methinketh, to Bahram Chubina,
Son of Gashasp, a noble, well skilled horseman
To whom thou gavest Ardabfl and Barda’

Google
<pb n="100"/>
C. 1807

100 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

?

Where he became marchlord with drums and troops.’
The Shah dispatched a speedy cameleer

To bid Bahram Chubina dally not

Upon the way but come from Ardabil

To court alone without the drums and host.!

The messenger the joyful news conveyed,

And told him what Mihran Sitad had said.

$7
How Bahram Chiibina came to Hurmuzd and was
made Captain of the Host

Not calling any of his warriors
That world-aspirant hurried off from Barda’,
And when he came the Shah accorded audience.
On seeing the visage of the king of kings
The veteran much praised that noble one,
Who at first sight grew favourably disposed,
Perceived the marks named by Mihran Sitad
In him, smiled and grew blithe of countenance,
Received him well and lodged him splendidly.
When sombre night flung off its musky veil,
And Sol displayed its face, the marchlord came
To court, and all the chiefs made way for him.
The world-lord summoned him and made him sit
Among the magnates, told him how [ran
Was placed and what Mihran Sitad had said,
Then asked about king Sawa, saying: ‘Shall I
Make peace or send forth troops ? ”’

The warrior
Replied : ‘‘ We may not make a peace with him,
For, since he fain would fight, to sue for peace

' Reading with P.

Google
<pb n="101"/>
HURMUZD IOI

Will mean defeat for us; the foe moreover
Will be emboldened if he see thee weak.
To proffer feast in war-time is to make
Contention like submission.”
Said Hurmuzd :—
“What is the course then ? Shall I seek delay,
Or march to battle ? ”
He made answer thus :—
‘It augureth well if! foes behave unjustly.
What said the noble counsellor ? ‘No match
For justice is injustice.’ Therefore seek
To fight with this injurious enemy,
For fire and water will not flow together ;?
But if thou actest otherwise herein
The ancient sky will choose another Shah.
If we put forth the might of our own arms,
And what we have of prowess, holy God
Will neither blame us nor shall we be shamed
Before the heroes when the truth is sought.
Shall we be weak enough to shun the combat
While yet ten thousand of franians
Remain unslain ? What will malignants say
To thee if thou flee foes without a fight ?
When I pour arrows down on them and make
My bow as ’twere a cloud in Spring, and when
A hundred thousand swords and iron maces
Are brandished in the ranks of war, and yet
We gain no glimpse of triumph but despair
Of fortune in our hearts, then we will be
Our foemen’s to command for we shall have
No body, life or spirit, left to us ;
But let us struggle till we see if heaven
Will bring us gain or loss.”’
On hearing this
The Shah smiled and the court grew bright, and then

1 Reading with P. "Id.

Google

C. 1808
<pb n="102"/>
102 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST

The veterans left the presence with full hearts,
And talking with Bahram Chubina said :—

‘* Henceforth if he shall speak with thee be modest,
Because king Sawa hath such mighty powers
That e’en to ants and gnats they bar the way !
Who after what thou said’st before the Shah

Will venture to be captain of the host ? ”’

He answered them: “ Illustrious warriors !

I will be captain by our great Shah’s leave.”

Informants on the watch went to the world’s

king,

And told him of this speech and ten times more.
The king of kings rejoiced thereat and ceased
To fear those troops. He gave Bahram Chubina
The chief command, exalting to the clouds
His valiant head. All warriors that sought
For glory hailed him captain of the host.
He came before the king with girded loins,
Equipped for war, and said: “ By thy permission
I will call o’er the roll and ascertain
Who are the fighting-men and who are slack
In quest of fame.”

The Shah said: “ Thou art leader
Responsible for good and 111 alike.”’

The chief went to the royal muster-ground,
And bade the troops parade. He made his choice
Of those that were the crown among the chiefs,
And entered on the roll twelve thousand names
Of mail-clad warriors on barded steeds.

All those enrolled were forty years of age;
The older and the younger were rejected.
Bahram Chubina held the chief command

As one renowned in war. He made one hight
Yalan-sina—a man of vengeful breast—?!
Chief of the warrior-chiefs to go before

1 Sina.

Google
<pb n="103"/>
HURMUZD 103

The ranks on battle-days, to wheel his steed,

Proclaim his ancestry, and set on strife

The warriors’ thoughts. One named Izid Gashasp,?

Who drew not rein at fire, he bade to guard

The baggage-train and dress the wings. He made

Kanda Gashasp, who as he rode would grasp

The tails of lions, leader of the rear.

Then to the troops thus spake the paladin :—

‘Ye ardent chiefs! if ye would have God’s help

In lightening your dark task inflict not harm

Or loss and never gird your loins for ull,

And when at night the clarion-call ariseth

Leap up and one and all so spur your steeds

That im the dark more tumult may arise.

Through strength derived from resting horse and

man

Will take no thought about the day of battle.”’
When tidings reached the king of how the wise

Bahram Chubina acted he rejoiced

Both at the words and deeds ;_ he oped his treasures,

And paid the troops. He gave Bahram withal?

Arms from the magazines which he unlocked,

Assembled in the city all the herds

Of battle-steeds that were at large, and ordered

The captain of the host to ask of him

Whate’er was needful, saying: “‘ Thou hast seen

All sorts of warfare and hast heard what stores

King Sawa, that illustrious man, possesseth

Of treasure, arms, and troops, and how his Turks

Set earth a-quaking on the day of battle.

Now thou hast chosen out of all the host

Twelve thousand men in mail on barded steeds !

I know not how such numbers can avail

Upon the day of fight, and thou hast chosen,

Instead of youthful sworders, men of forty ! ”’

1 Reading with P. ' Id.

Google

C. 1809
<pb n="104"/>
104 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

The chief replied: ‘‘ Well-starred and courteous
Shah !

The saying of the mighty thou hast heard,

Who ruled the world as Shahs in days of old :—

* When conquering fortune is assisting thee

‘Tis well though little other aid there be,’

And by this token I will prove it too

If now the Shah, whose word is law, will hear:

When Kai Kaus was in Hamavaran,

In bonds with countless others, Rustam chose

Twelve thousand fit and warlike cavaliers,

And freed him, and no harm befell the chiefs.
C. 1810 Again, Gudarz, son of Kishwad, the head

Of noble and illustrious men, employed

Twelve thousand men in mail on barded steeds

To execute revenge for Siyawush.

Again, the glorious Asfandiyar

Was leader of twelve thousand warriors

Against Arjasp and by a stratagem

Made dust fly out of host and hold alike.!

When any host exceedeth this amount

It is too large for dash and enterprise ;

The leader that conducteth countless troops

To battle is discomfited in fight.

As for thy saying: * Men of forty years

Are not so eager for the fight as youths,’

The man of forty hath experience,

And excellence in point of hardihood,

Remembering the seal of bread and salt

O’er which the heaven hath so oft revolved.

In dread too of the voice of calumny,

And loss of fame, he shirketh not the fight.

Moreover wife and child and family

1 In the accounts given in the poem of these instances the limita-
tion to twelve thousand is recorded only in the case of Asfandivar.
Later on Gurdya, Bahram Chubina’s sister, repeats the statement
about Rustam. See p. 108.

Google
<pb n="105"/>
HURMUZD 105

Irk not the feelings of a veteran.
A young man is deceived by outward show,
And when he should have patience he 1s rash.
He hath not wife or child or tilth; to him
The worthy and the worthless seem alike.
Since wisdom resteth on experience
He seeth not the import of affairs.
If he is conqueror in any fight
He laugheth with delight and wasteth time ;
But if one chanceth to prevail against him
His foes see nothing but his back.”’

On hearing,
The king grew fresh as roses in the Spring,
Then said: ‘‘ Depart, put on thy mail, and go
Forth from the palace to the riding-ground.”’

The general left the king, called for his girdle,
Mail-coat, and Ruman helm, had his steed barded,
And set the coiled up lasso in its straps.

The world-lord with his arrows, clubs, and balls

Went out upon the ground with his wazirs.

The general approached with mace and mail

And Ruiman casque. The world-lord, seeing, blessed
him.

He kissed the ground and showed a liege’s prowess

With mace, at polo, and in archery.

The king then had the banner brought that bare

A violet dragon for device, the banner

That had been borne in fight in front of Rustam,}

Grasped it immediately and, handling it

With smiles, bestowed it on Bahram Chubina,

Invoking many a blessing on him, saying :—

** My predecessors used to hail as chief

Of all our race the man whose name was Rustam,

The paladin, the conqueror of the world,

Triumphant and of ardent soul. Thou holdest

1 Cf. Vol. il. p. 154.

Google

C. 181r
<pb n="106"/>
106 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

His flag. Mayst thou be conquering and loyal!
Thou art a second Rustam to my thoughts
In courage, prowess, and obedience.”
The paladin saluted him and said :—
** Be always conquering and bright of mind.”’
With peerless Rustam’s banner in his hand
The general left the plain for his abode,
And on their several ways the Shah’s troops went.
The captain of the host was well content.

§ 8

How Bahrédm Chiubina went with twelve thousand
Cavaliers to fight King Sdwa

When morning dawned upon the mountain-tops,
And when the glittering Shield of Gold appeared,
The chief came to the palace of the Shah,
And prostrate in the presence of the troops
Spake thus: “‘ I was a man that had no claims,
But by thy Grace became the age’s crown.
I have to beg one favour of the king—
That he will send with me a trusty man
To make a note of those that fight and lay
A hostile head beneath the dust and thus
Achieve their end.”’

Hurmuzd replied: ‘ Mihran,
The old, is great,! observant, eloquent,”
Bade him accompany the chief and quit
The palace for the combat. From the province
Of Taisafun the army marched, their leader
Bahram Chuibina. ’Twas a prudent, brave,
And dauntless host, and wary as a lion

1 Reading with P.

Google
<pb n="107"/>
HURMUZD 107

Was their commander. When he had departed
The monarch of the world himself withdrew,
Was privy with his archimage! and said :—
“* Upon the day of fight this man will laugh
For joy! What will result ? Let us confer.”
The archmage answered: *‘ Mayst thou live for
ever,
For thou deservest everlasting life.
This paladin possessed of such a mien
And stature, ready speech and ardent soul,
Must needs be happy and victorious,
And cause a barren world to bring forth fruit ;
But yet I fear me that he will revolt
At last against his sovereign and patron
Because he talked with such audacity,
And spake so like a lion to the Shah.”’
Hurmuzd made answer to him: ‘ Mingle not
Bane with the antidote, misdoubting one!
If he shall prove victorious o’er king Sawa
I ought to yield to him the crown and throne.
May he be ever as now for he will make
A glorious sovereign ! ”’
The archimage,
On hearing what the Shah said, paled and bit
His lips. The king himself moreover kept
The thing in mind, and in a while selected
A courtier as his confidant to learn
How matters stood, and said: ‘* Pursue in haste
The paladin and tell what thou observest.”’
The agent followed swiftly, known to none.
He was a guide, in omens skilled, and used
To utter his prognostics to the Shah.
Bahram Chubina, quitting Taisafun,
Led on the host himself. In front appeared,
And far from him, one that purveyed sheep’s heads,

* Ayin Gashasp.

Google

C. 1812
<pb n="108"/>
C. 1813

108 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Which rose above a clean draped wicker tray.
The chieftain urged his horse and, strange to tell !
Pierced one head with his spear, rode off with it
Aloft, then flung it where he would and drew
An omen from the matter, saying thus :—
** Just so will I cut off king Sawa’s head,
Will throw it in his army’s line of march,
And shatter all his host.”’
The emissary,
Sent by the Shah, drew too his presage, saying :—
** This favourite of fortune will attain,
His labours done, the crown at last for when
His end is gained he will grow troublesome,
And will rebel.”’
He went and told the king,
Who wedded grief and anguish for the words
Were worse than death to him. He withered up,
That verdant leaf grew sere. He called to him
A young man of the court and sent him off
In all haste to the paladin and said :—
** Depart and tell the captain of the host :—
‘For this night tarry where thou art. At dawn
Turn back and come to me for I would clear
The court of strangers and advise thee further,
For thoughts of profit have occurred to me.’ ”’
The messenger came to the paladin,
And told what he had heard. Bahram Chubina
Made this reply: ‘‘ Men do not, O wise Shah!
Recall an army on the march; such action
Would be ill-omened and would reinforce
The foe. I will return when I have conquered,
And then thy kingdom and thy diadem
Shall shine.”’
The messenger returned and gave
The warrior’s answer to the Shah and he
Was satisfied. That envoy’s toil was vain.

Google
<pb n="109"/>
HURMUZD 109

At dawn the captain of the host led on
The ‘troops and called God’s blessing down on
them.
He marched to Khuzistan :! the troops harmed
none.
There came @ woman with a sack of hay
Among them and a horseman purchased it,
Refused to pay her, and made off. She came
Lamenting to Bahram Chubina, saying :—
‘* | have some hay concealed. I brought a sack’s
worth,
And passed before thy troops. A cavalier,
With iron helm, hath taken it from me
While on the march! ”’ ,
Forthwith they sought the man,
And haled him quickly to the general.
The brave Bahram Chubina said to him :—
** So thou didst think this fault a little one! ”’
They smashed his head and hands and feet. The
chief
Had him dragged forth before the camp-enclosure,
Then clave him through the middle with the sword,
And filled the heart of the unjust with terror.
Then from the camp-enclosure ‘twas proclaimed :—
**Q ye illustrious men and of good will!
The stealer of a stalk of hay shall find
No intercessor. I will cleave his waist
Asunder with the sword. Let all procure
By payment what they need.”
Bahram Chubina
Led on his host well ordered and they marched
Toward Damaghan.
The Shah was full of care

1 This seems toimply that he started from Pars. Later on he says
(p. 112) that he started from Baghdad, 2.e., from the neighbourhood
of Taisafun (Ctesiphon) where the troops were stationed (p. go).
Baghdad itself was not then in existence.

Google
<pb n="110"/>
1IO THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

At Sawa’s army, elephants, and treasures,}

And spake thus to Kharrad, son of Barzin,

One night at rise of moon: “ Prepare to go

To our opponent and be diligent,

Not slumbering but speeding. Mark his troops

As to their numbers and their quality,

And who their leader and their warriors are.”
He ordered that a letter of advice

Should be indited to the hostile king,

And countless royal presents sent therewith.

He said thus to the messenger: ‘“‘ Proceed

Toward Harat and if a host appear

Know it for that of brave Bahram Chubina,

C. 1814 And not another. Then approach and tell him
What thou hast heard from me, thus saying: ‘I
By good news and by blandishment will spread
A fresh snare for the foe. Thy secret purpose
Must be kept hidden. If he hear thy name
And fame ...! I will induce him to thy net,
Employing fair and lengthy parleyings.’ ”’

Kharrad, son of Barzin, prepared to start,
Came as the Shah had bidden and delivered
The message when he saw Bahram Chubina.
He went thence to king Sawa, to the place
Where were the elephants and troops and treasure,
And, having audience, did him reverence,
Delivering the message privily,
And adding to it every argument
To draw the army to Harat. When Sawa
Arrived and camped upon the river-bank
The outposts went forth, marked Bahram Chubina
With all his troops and, secing that stout host,
Returned in all haste to king Sawa, saying :—
‘* A force hath reached the desert of Harat,
Commanded by a famous chief.”

1 Two couplets omitted.

Google
<pb n="111"/>
HURMUZD \ INI

King Sawa,
Concerned what course to take, called from the tent
The envoy of the Shah and rated him :—
‘“‘Didst not foresee, thou crafty Ahriman !
A fall from thy high station ? From the court
Of that vile Shah thou camest to ensnare me,
And leadest forth to war a Persian host,
Encamping on the meadows of Harat !”’

Kharrad, son of Barzin, replied: ‘“‘ The force
Confronting thine is small. Take not its coming
In ill part; ’*tis some marchlord passing by,

Or some chief seeking shelter with the Shah,
Or merchants who have brought an escort with
them ,
To guard them on their way. Who would confront
thee,
Though mountains turn to seas, to seek revenge ?
I will send one to find out who or what
This traveller is.’’2
His words rejoiced king Sawa,
Who said: “In truth that is the course to take.
We will dispatch to learn if friend or foe
They be.”
Now as Kharrad, son of Barzin,

Withdrew to his own tent the night o’ertopped
The mountains, and he gat in readiness
To flee the wrath to come. At dead of night
The monarch bade Faghfur go with an escort
Forth from his father to the paladin.
That understanding youth went forth and reaching
The [rdnian host dispatched a cavalier
To ask: ‘“‘ Who are these warriors and wherefore
March they ? ”

The horseman went like dust and cried :—
‘* Who are your chiefs and leader, noble sirs !

This couplet inserted from P.

Google

C. 1815
<pb n="112"/>
112 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

And champion in the combat, for Faghfur,

Who is king Sawa’s heart and eyes, would sce him

Without attendance ? ”’

Came a warrior
Forth from the troops and told Bahram Chubina
What he had heard. The captain of the host
Went from the tent-enclosure and his flag
Was reared resplendent over him. Faghfur
Of Chin, perceiving, hasted and made sweat

His prancing steed, and questioned: ‘‘ Whence art

thou ?
Why haltest here? I hear that thou hast fled

From Pars as one who being wronged shed blood.”’

Bahrim Chubina answered: “ God forbid
That I should purpose vengeance on the Shah.
I came forth from Baghdad with this array
To fight by his command, for.when the news
About king Sawa and his host reached court
He said to me: ‘Go forth and hold the road
With arrows, maces, spears, and scimitars.’ ”’

On hearing this Faghfur sped back to tell
His sire how matters stood. Being thus apprised,
And grown suspicious, Sawa sought forthwith
The envoy of the Shah but some one said :—
‘** Kharrad, son of Barzin, hath fled with tears
Of blood at having come.”’

** How could that foe,”

Said Sawa to his son, “ get clear away
At night from such a countless host as this,
And wherefore have the guards been so remiss ? ”’

Google

<pb n="113"/>
HURMUZD 113

§ 9
How King Sawa sent a Message to Bahram Chibina
and his Answer

He sent thereafter to Bahram Chubina
A fluent elder, saying: “ Go and tell
This Persian: ‘ Mar not out of foolishness
Thy reputation here, for surely thou
Must know this much—that that great king of thine
Would have thy life and therefore sendeth thee
To fight with one nigh peerless in the world.
He said to thee: ‘* Go forth and seize their road,”’
And thou unwillingly didst hear the words,
For with my troops and elephants I trample
A mountain if it cometh in my path.’ ”
Bahram Chubina, hearing what he said,
Smiled at that hasty trafficking and answered :—
‘“ If my death be the world-lord’s hidden purpose
My duty is to do what pleaseth him
Though earth shall take the measure of my height.”’
The messenger, returning to king Sawa,
Reported what he heard the warrior say,
And Sawa said: “ Go, tell the Persian thus :—
* Why talk so much ? Why art thou in the field ?
Ask what thou wilt of me.’ ”
The messenger

Went to Bahram Chubina and thus spake :—
** Reveal thy purposes because my king
Is favoured by the stars and he would have
Thee do his will.”

Bahrém Chubina said :—
Say: ‘If thou wouldst do right act openly.
If friendship with the monarch of the world
Be secretly thy wish I will receive thee

VOL, VIII. H

Google

C. 1816
<pb n="114"/>
C. 1817

114 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

On this march as a guest and pledge myself
To grant thee thy desires. I will bestow
On thy troops gold and silver, crowns and girdles
Upon those worthy of them. I will send
The Shah a cavalier that he may come
Half way to meet thee and, as equals do,
Provide thee provand. If thou art a friend
He will make much of thee, but if thou hast
Come hither for contention, to the deep,
And to the crocodile’s maw, then thou shalt quit
The desert of Harat in such a plight
That all chiefs shall bewail thee. May a ditch
Be at thy door on thy return, may blast
Pursue and rain companion thee, for naught
But ill luck brought thee hither, being fain
That ill befall thy head.’ ”’
The messenger
Turned back, came like the wind, and gave the
answer

Of that aspirant. Hearing it king Sawa
Was wroth with that stone-hearted opposite ;
His heart was straitened at that chill response,
And thinking of it filled his cheeks with shame.
He said : “‘ Go, take yon human div this message :—
* Thou hast no fame in war; I would not slay thee.
Such as thy Shah are servants at my court,
And set by thee my meanest slaves are chiefs.
If thou shalt ask for quarter at my hands
I will exalt thy head above the throng,
Thou shalt have many gifts from me, and all
Thy troops shall be enriched ; but one aspiring
To valour looketh not to futile words
And deeds of madness.’ ”’

That proud monarch’s envoy
Came to Bahram Chubina and delivered
Those biting words which yet were what he wished.

Google
<pb n="115"/>
HURMUZD II5

On hearing he informed the man: “ Thy lord

Must hear my answer: ‘ If I am so mean

That meanness covereth my head with shame,

The king of kings for his part was ashamed

To come out in his wrath to fight with thee.

"Tis through my meanness that I have marched
forth

With troops to wreck the kindred of king Sawa.

I will cut off his head and carry it

Before the Shah; it is not worth my while

To stick it on my spear upon the road.

For me to grant thee quarter would demean thee,

But I will fall upon thee in my meanness.

Thou shalt not see me save upon the day

Of fight and followed by my dark-blue flag,

Because if thou upon that dragon glance

"Tis death; thy head and helm shall sheath my
lance.’ ”’ :

§ 10
How King Sdwa and Bahram Chibina set the Battle
in Array against each other

King Sawa’s envoy, when he heard those words

Of stern defiance, showed his back. He went,

And told what he had heard and seen whereat

The Turks’ king’s head breathed vengeance and he
bade

To bring the tymbals forth and to lead out

The elephants high-crested to the plain.

The realm was darkened with the dust of hoofs,

The trumpets blared. Now when Bahram Chubina

Heard that a host had come, and plains and vales

Were yellow, red, and black, he bade his men

Google
<pb n="116"/>
C. 1818

116 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSTI

Mount and rode forth in armour, mace in hand.
Behind him lay Harat, before a host
Of swordsmen. He drew up the wings. The troops
Were as one heart and body. Thou hadst said :—
** The world is all cuirass ; a star is shining
On every spear.”
King Sawa viewed that field,

Its order and array, perceived that while
Bahram Chubina rested on Harat
His own position was both cramped and ill,
And thus addressed his horsemen, veterans,
And intimates: ‘“ A lying messenger
Came from the Persian leader of the folk,
And tarried till yon host had seized the city,
And left me nothing but a brake of thorns ! ”

He ranked his army in that straitened place,
The air was indigo and earth was hidden.
Upon the right were two score thousand horsemen,
Who used two-headed darts and wielded spears,
With two score thousand on the left withal,
All archers and engrossers of the fray,
While two score thousand warriors formed the centre,
Who carried spear or sword, and two score thousand
He stationed in the rear; but many troops
Were left unused for he was cramped for room.
They placed the elephants before the line,
As ’twere a wall, and barred the way in front.
Thus circumstanced king Sawa’s heart was grieved
By reason of this straitening of his host.
Thou wouldst have said: *“‘ His fortune hath fore-

shown

To him the presage of an empty throne.”

Google
<pb n="117"/>
HURMUZD 117

$11

How King Sdwa sent another Message to Bahram
Chibina and his Answer

Then from the champaign of Harat he sent

Again a warrior of eloquence,

A man all guileful, to Bahram Chubina

To say: “ Thou hast not wedded heaven’s own for-
tune :

Wilt thou not hear advice and such appeals ?

Make friends with wisdom, open thine heart’s eyes.

Thou hast found two whose equals in the world

- Have never yet been born of royal race ;

They shine like suns in heaven and all the year

Are clad in mail, they are so valorous.

One is myself, the lawful king of earth ;

The other is my high-born son Parmuda.

My troops are more than leaves upon the trees,

Had some the skill to number them. If I

Should reckon up my men and elephants

Thou wouldest smile at rain-drops from Spring-clouds.

There are tents, tent-enclosures, implements

Of war beyond conception ; shouldst thou count

Withal my steeds and men, my wastes and moun-
tains,

Thou wouldest marvel. All the other kings,

If worthy of such honour, are my lieges.

If seas had life! and mountains feet to run

They could not carry off my treasury,

Arms, implements, and fruitage of my toils.

The glorious Great, save for thy Persian lord,

Throughout the world acclaim me as their king,

And thy life also lieth in my hands

As well I know. If I lead on my troops

1 *€ Si eau de la mer inondait Ja terre.’’ Mohl.

Google

C. 1819
<pb n="118"/>
118 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

They will not let pass ant and gnat. Withal
I have a thousand barded elephants
Whose scent affrayeth horsemen. Who will come
To face me from {ran and from Turan,
And by such coming aggravate my toils ?
From this place to the gates of Taisafun .
My powers extend, will stay, be amplified.
Some one hath duped thee, O mine enemy !
Some one, perchance a madman, for thou lov’st not
Thyself or else dissemblest since thine eye
Discriminateth not ’twixt good and ul.
How should such foolishness become the wise ?
Cease this contention and present thyself
’ Before me, and I will not keep thee waiting,
But give to thee high office and my daughter
With worship and a crown. Thou shalt receive
A lordship at our hands and suffer not
The ills that subjects bear, and when the Shah
Shall have been slain in fight, and when his crown
And throne are mine, on thee will I bestow them
With all his treasure, diadem, and goods.
Thence will I march on Rum and then the troops,
The treasure and the land, will all be thine.
Thus have I spoken for thou pleasest me,
And wisely hast thou dealt with these affairs.
Thou knowest the conduct and the art of war;
Thy sire and grandsire held command in chief,
So what I say is not mere compliment
But pity for thy sake who hast arrayed
Thy puny force to fight with me to-day.
Thou shalt receive no further messages
If thou art retrograde to my desires.”

The envoy spake, the chieftain heard and made
A grim response: “‘O man of evil mark!
Among the magnates and the eminent
None reverenceth a monarch profitless

Google |
<pb n="119"/>
HURMUZD 119

And wordy. From thy talk from first to last

I have perceived thee confident in speech.

The man whose day is ending seeketh prowess

In words not deeds. I heard thy feckless parle,

Yet my heart quaileth not for fear of harm.

As for thy saying: ‘I will slay the Shah,

And give thee realm and throne,’ a chief once said: —

‘If thou shalt drive a mendicant away

From any town is he not sure to say :—

** There I was lord; the rest were neath my sway ?’’’

In our affair there will not intervene

Two days of sunlight ere I shall dispatch

By this same token to the Shah thy head

Upon a spear. Again, for what thou saidest

About thy daughter, treasure, troops, and realm,

I should have thanked thee once and should have
called thee

A monarch of discernment thus to give,

Without designs upon the franian throne,

Thy daughter to me and with her dispatch

A gorgeous throne and goods. Then thou hadst had

Myself for friend within Iran, not fought

Against its warriors; but now my lance

Is at thine ear and with my sword will I

Behead thee, and when thou hast gone thy pate,

Thy crown and treasure, are mine, and mine withal

Thy daughter and the fruit of thy past toils.

Thou saidest further: ‘ I have crowns and thrones

With elephants and horsemen past compute.’

A chief said, battling in the ranks of war :—

* The longer water is denied a hound

The greater will his eagerness be found.’

The divs seduced thy heart so that thou camest

To fight the Shah and thou wilt writhe beneath

God’s chastisement and for thine evil deeds.

Again, thou sayest: ‘I have among my lieges

Google

C. 1820
<pb n="120"/>
120 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Great men possessed of crowns and coronets,
And all the cities of the world are mine.’
The age herein is witness to thy words.
To cities roads are open, lord and liege
May tramp the marches, but if thou shalt knock
Upon a city-gate thy kingship there
Will prove a brake of thorns. As for thine offer
To pardon me—a craven in thine eyes—
Thou wilt forgive me not when thou hast seen
My spear and shalt not have me as a hege.
As for thy troops, desires, and policy,
Thy mighty elephants and throne, what time
I rank mine army I account them naught,
And care no jot for all thy warriors.
Though thou art king thou utterest such lies
That thou wilt gain no glory in the world.
For what thou saidest: ‘I approve of thee,
And would select thee as my general,’
What I approve, since reaching man’s estate,
Is the approval of the king of kings.
I have allowed the king three days and when
The Glory of the Lustre of the world
Shall show, the army in [ran shall see
Thy head upon a spear before the Shah.”
The messenger returned with cheeks like gall,
And fruitful, youthful fortune waxen old.
He told king Sawa what the answer was,
And at his words the monarch’s visage loured.
Said the Faghfur: ‘‘ What feebleness is this ?
Yon little host should rather ask our tears.”
Then to the entry of the camp-enclosure
He went and bade bring forth the Indian bells,
Gongs, mighty elephants, and kettledrums,
And make heaven ebon-hued. While that famed
youth
Prepared to fight the haughty monarch mused ;

Google
<pb n="121"/>
HURMUZD 121

Then to his son: “ Thou chosen of the troops !
Refrain from fighting till to-morrow morn.” .

The troops withdrew on both sides and the watch
Went from the tent-enclosures. In both hosts
They kindled fires, and rumour filled all coasts.

§12
How Bahrém Chibina had a Dream in the Night, how

he gave Battle the next Morning, and how King
Sdwa was slain

Now when Bahram Chubina was alone

Within his tent he sent and! called the Iranians,

And with his troops took counsel for the fight

Till dark, till Turk and Persian both reposed,

And he that would might have the world for naught;

But brave Bahram Chubina still mused war,

While sleeping in his tent. That Lion dreamed

That in the fight the Turks proved valorous,

While his own troops were routed and himself,

Debarred more strife, unsuccoured and afoot,

Asked quarter of the heroes of the foe.

He woke in grief, his noble head sore troubled,

With pain and sorrow passed the hours of dark,

Arrayed himself but told to none his dream.

Just then arrived Kharrad, son of Barzin,

Who had escaped king Sawa, and spake thus :—?

‘** What confidence is this ? Behold the snare

Of Ahriman and give not to the winds

frdnian lives but treat these nobles fairly ;

For valour’s sake take pity on thy life,

For nevermore will such a task confront thee.”’
‘““ Thy city,’ said Bahram Chubina, “ yieldeth

No valour save thy sample, for all there

‘Reading with P. * Two couplets omitted.

Google
<pb n="122"/>
. 1822

122 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Sell fish from Summer-time! till snow-storms come.
Thy work is net and pond; thou art no man
For spear and mace and arrow. When the sun
Shall rise o’er yon dark mountains I will show thee
How kings and soldiers fight. Thou shalt behold
Those elephants and troops of his and all
His fair presentment prostrate in the dust.”’

When Sol arose from Leo, and the world
Grew white as Ruman’s face, the trumpet sounded,
The battle-cry went up, earth shook beneath
The horses’ hoofs, Bahram Chubina ranged
His host and mounting grasped a war-worn mace.
They furnished for the right three thousand men,
All-cavaliers mail-clad and veteran.
He sent an equal number to the left,
All valiant, vengeful horsemen. On the right
Izid Gashasp, who rode through rivers, led,
And on the left Kanda Gashasp who worshipped
The glorious Azargashasp. Yalan-sina
Supported them with troops as a reserve.
Hamdan Gashasp was posted in the van,
A man whose horse-shoes set the reeds ablaze.
With each there were three thousand warriors,
All fighting cavaliers with hearts of stone.
It was proclaimed : “* Ye chiefs with golden crowns !
Whoe’er, though faced by lion or by pard,
Shall flee the fight, by God! I will behead him,
And burn his useless carcase in the fire.”

On each side of the host there was a road
Whereby he? might retreat. On each he raised
A bank ten cubits high. His own position
Was at the centre, and to him there came
The archscribe® of the king of kings and said :—
‘* This is beyond thy power and thus to mock
At fortune cannot prosper. Of the troops

» Tamuz. * Bahram Chubina. * Mihran. See p. 106.

Google
<pb n="123"/>
HURMUZD 123

Upon this field we are the one white hair,
Note, on a sable ox! No soil or stream,
Or hill is visible, so many are
The swordsmen of Turan ! ”’
Bahram Chubina
Cried at him furiously: “ Thou recreant wretch !
Thy business is with inkstand and with paper :
Who bade thee take the number of the host ? ”
The scribe approached Kharrad, son of Barzin,
And said: ‘“ Bahram Chubfna and the Div
Are mates! ”’ |
Those scribes then sought a way to flee
That they might not behold that day of doom.
They feared both king of kings and arrow-rain,
And bit their lips. On one side and afar
From those Turanian horsemen they beheld
A height precipitous and thither fared
A-tremble, saying: ‘ We must watch the host.”’
They gazed upon Bahram Chubina’s helm
To see how he would fight when roused. That hero,
When he had drawn his host up, left the field,
And with loud outcries, prostrate in the dust
Before his God, exclaimed: ‘* O righteous Judge !
If in thy sight this conflict is unjust,
And thou preferrest Sawa to myself,
Give my heart rest in battle and to Sawa
His whole desire upon the [ranians ;
But if I undergo this toil for Thee,
And risk my head in fight, make jubilant
Me and my troops and by our combating
The world all prosperous.”’
Still praying loudly
He mounted with his ox-head mace in hand.!
King Sawa thus addressed his host: ‘“ Begin
Your incantations that the [rdénians

1 Two couplets omitted.

Google

C. 1823
<pb n="124"/>
C. 1824

124 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

May quail in heart and eye, and no disaster
Befall yourselves.”

Then all the sorcerers
Began their spells and hurled fire through the air.
Rose blast and murky cloud whence arrows showered
Upon the Iranians. Bahram Chubina
Exclaimed : “ Chiefs, magnates of frdn, and heroes !
Shut ye your eyes to all these magic arts,
And come all wroth to fight, for this is naught
But trick and sorcery, and they that use
Such means demand our tears.”’

The Iranians shouted,
And girt their loins for bloodshed, while king Sawa
Surveyed the field, saw that the foe recoiled not
At those black arts but came on all the more,
Led by Bahram Chiubina, and assailed,
Like wolf a lamb, their left, brake it and charged,
Like one bemused, Bahram Chubina’s centre,
Who thence saw how his soldiers fled the foe,
Came, with his spear unhorsed three warriors,
And dashed them headlong to the ground, exclaim-
ing :—

‘“‘ This is the way to fight, this 1s the mode,
And how to do it! Are ye not ashamed
Before the Lord of earth, the glorious chiefs,
And nobles ? ”’

Then he made toward the right,
As ’twere a lusty lion famishing,
And brake the mighty force opposed to him,
So that their leader’s banner disappeared.
Thence he departed to his army’s centre,
To where the leader was among the troops,
And said to him: “ Perdition take it all!
If this fight last the host will be dispersed !
Look out in what direction to retreat.”

' Three couplets omitted.

Google
<pb n="125"/>
HURMUZD 125

They went and sought; there was not any way
Because the proper road was mounded over.
Then to that leader said Bahram Chubina :—
‘* There is an iron wall in front of us,
And only he that knoweth how to make
A breach therein can gain the other side,
Safe-guard himself and carry to [ran,
And to the monarch of the brave, his life.
All put your whole heart in it, shield your heads,
And ply your swords. If sleepless fortune help us
It will repay our toils with thrones and crowns.
Let none despair of God or ye may see
Your white day turn to gloom.”

King Sawa thus

Harangued his chiefs: ‘* Advance the elephants
Before the host, attack in force, and make
The world both dark and narrow to our foes.”

Bahram Chubina from afar beheld
The elephants, was grieved, unsheathed his sword,
And thus addressed his captains: ‘‘ Warriors famed !
String up your bows of Chach and helm ye all.
Now by the life and head of this world’s king,
The chosen of the lords and crown of chiefs,
Let every one that hath artillery
String up his bow perforce and let him fix
His arrows, fashioned out of triple wood,
Whose points are keen for blood, upon the trunks
Of yonder elephants, then out with mace,
On to the fight, and slay your enemies.”’

The chieftain strung his bow and set a casque
Of steel upon his head. He made his bow
As ’twere a cloud in Spring and showered arrows
Before the host: the soldiers followed him.
The stars were dimmed by pointed, feathered shafts.
They pierced the elephants’ trunks, and dale and

plain

Google
<pb n="126"/>
. 1825

126 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Grew like a pool of blood. The elephants

Turned from the smart and fled the battlefield.

Now when the elephants were smitten thus

They trampled their own troops. The Iranian host

Came on behind and earth grew like the Nile.

All was confusion ; many died; ill fortune

Had all its will of them. There was a spot,

A pleasant place, behind that stricken host

Where, on a golden throne, fierce Sawa sat.

He saw his army like an iron mountain

In flight with heads all dust and souls all gloom,

While from behind enormous elephants

Beyond control were trampling down the troops.

He wept for wherefore should his army flee ?

And mounting his bay Arab fled himself

In dire dismay. Bahram Chubina came

Pursuing like an elephant run mad,

A lasso on his arm, a bow in hand,

And shouted to his troops: “ Illustrious men !

Ill fate hath marked them out. Rain swords on
them,

And quit you in the fight like cavaliers.”’

He reached the hill where erst king Sawa sat
Crowned on a throne of gold, beheld him thence
Upon his mighty lion of an Arab,

And sped forth like a tiger o’er the waste.

He chose an arrow with a glittering point,

Plumed with four eagle’s feathers, took in hand

His bow of Chach and laid the deer-hide thong
Within his thumb-stall, straightened his left arm,
And bent his right. The bow twanged as he loosed
The shaft and pierced king Sawa’s spine, who came
Down headlong to the dust ; the ground beneath him
Was soaked with blood. Of that great host the king
Bediademed was gone, gone golden throne,

 Couplet omitted.

Google
<pb n="127"/>
HURMUZD 12

“I

And golden crown. :
Such deeds the turning sky
Doth, showing neither love nor enmity.

Joy not in lofty throne and greatly fear,

What time thou feel’st secure, disaster near.

The brave Bahram Chubina came and dragged
The corpse face downward wallowing in the dust,
And severed that crowned head while none of all
Its kindred came anear. When the Turks found
Their king the corpse lay headless on the road.
All wailed ; cries filled the earth ; the air resounded,
And he that was the son of Sawa said :—

‘““ This is God’s doing, for unsleeping fortune
Is with Bahram Chubina.”’ |

Multitudes
Died in the strait defiles. The elephants
Trod many under foot ; not one in ten
Of all that host escaped. They perished crushed
Beneath the elephants or were beheaded
Upon the battlefield, and when nine hours
Of that ill day had gone the [ranians saw
No enemy alive save prisoners bound,
Their souls and bodies pierced with grief and shafts.
The route was strewn with bards and helms whose

heads

Were suffocate therein,! with Indian swords,
With arrows and with bows dropped by the foe
On all sides. Earth was like a sea of blood
With slain, and everywhere were saddled steeds.

Bahram Chubina went his rounds to learn

Who had been slain upon the [ranian side ;
Then said he to Kharrad, son of Barzin :—
‘** Give me thine aid to-day and ascertain

What slain [rdnians it is ours to mourn.”

1 “de casques qui n’avaient pas garanti ce jour-la les tétes contre
la mort.’’ Mohl.

Google

C. 1826
<pb n="128"/>
C. 1827

128 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

He went through all the tents. One man of wor-
ship
Was missing in the host—a chieftain named
Bahram, who was the son of Sityawush,
A valiant prince, a magnate of fran,
Descended from a captain of the host.
Like one insane Kharrad went forth in quest
Of traces of him, moving many a form
Of slain and wounded men but found no sign.
The captain of the host was grieved thereat,
And cried: “‘ Alas! thou prudent warrior !”’
Howbeit the man himself appeared anon,
A key to that locked door, and with a Turk
Red-haired, cat-eyed, and, as thou wouldst have said,
With heart all wrung with rage. Bahram Chubina
Cried when he saw Bahram: “ Ne’er be it thine
To wed the dust ! ”’ then of that foul Turk asked :—
‘* QO thou hell-visaged, banned from Paradise !
What man art thou? What is thy name and birth,
For she who bare thee will have cause to weep ? ”’
He said: “‘ A warlock I. I meddle not
With manhood and with manliness but help
My chief in battle when things reach a pass,
And make him dream of what will hearten him.
I gave thee that ill dream last night to bring
Ill on thy head, but I must seek for means
More potent! for my sorcery hath failed,
Ill-fortune hath recoiled upon my head,
And all my toil is wedded to the wind.
If I get quarter from thee thou hast gained
An all-accomplished friend.”’
On hearing this
Bahram Chubina mused, his heart was troubled,
His visage wan. Anon he said: ‘ This man
Might prove of service in the stress of fight,”

* Reading with P.

Google

~~ eae me eer - ames eee PO

- 7 ’

<pb n="129"/>
HURMUZD 129

But said again: ‘“‘ What did king Sawa profit
Through this dark-dealing warlock ? All good things
Descend from God on fortune’s favourites,”’
Then bade cut off his head and robbed of life
His feckless form, which done Bahr4m Chubina
Stood up and said: “‘O just and upright Judge!
From Thee are greatness, victory, the Glory,
High place, the diadem of king of kings,
Distress and joy. Blest is the warrior
That followeth Thy way.”
The archscribe came,

And spake thus: ‘“ Valiant Fariduan, Bahram,!
And Nushirwan ne’er saw one like to thee,
O lusty paladin! Possessed art thou
Of lion’s courage, counsel, and device.
May no calamity befall thy life.
Through thee the cities of [ran all live,
And all the paladins are but thy slaves.
Through thee the exalted throne hath been exalted,
And every liege escaped mishap. Thou art
A chieftain and a chieftain’s son, and blest
Is she that brought forth such a child, for thou
Art glorious by birth and enterprise,
A king all absolute in Grace and wisdom.”

Then the Shah’s paladins and men of might
Dispersed themselves and left the scene of fight.

§13

How Bahram Chibina sent a Letter announcing his
Victory, and the Head of King Sdwa, to Hur-
muzd, and his Answer

When night had curled its locks and sent thereby
The eye to sleep, and when the Ebon Veil

* Bahram Gur probably is meant.
VOL. VII. l

Google
<pb n="130"/>
C. 1828

130 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Appeared, the world had respite from the drum.
Meanwhile the wheel of heaven turned apace

In view of darksome night and hurried on

Till from the deep a Golden Vessel rose,

And travail waxed and slumber fined away.
Then came the captain of the host and sent
Some one to bid his comrades good at need :—
“* All those that have been slain among the chiefs,
War-cavaliers and captains of the Turks,

Each leader of the folk, behead and set

Behind the heads of all of them that were
Those warriors’ diadem a flaunting flag.”

He had the captives and the heads collected,
And carried from the field, then called a scribe
And spake at large of that famed, countless host,
The movements and the day’s vicissitudes,

The battle and! the divers stratagems

That he had used against so vast a foe,

The toils and fighting of the [ranians,

And how no horsemen loosed his belt all day.
When he had written to the Shah he chose
A courier from the troops, first put upon

A lance the head of Sawa, then bade bear
The standard of that monarch and the heads
Of those chiefs of Turan and cavaliers

Of Chin withal upon a dromedary

With all speed to the Shah. The prisoners,
And whatsoever spoil there was he kept
Intact within Harat until the king

Should make his pleasure known. He sent withal
Experienced horsemen to escort the heads,
And to obtain permission from the Shah

To march against Parmuda with the host.
The dromedary started, and a guide

Led on the cavaliers who toiled and trod

1 Reading with P.

Google

ee a |

<pb n="131"/>
HURMUZD 131

The way that quickly they might see the Shah,
And greet him from the paladin and chiefs.

Upon their side the Turks all destitute
Went horseless, weaponless, and baggageless,
And both their cavaliers and those of Chin
Returned toward Tur4n. Now when the news
Came to Parmiuda he put off his crown,
While from the Turks arose a grievous wail ;
The day was bitter for those chiefs; all heads
Were full of dust, all eyes of tears, and none
Ate or reposed or slumbered. Then he summoned
The warriors and, weeping his heart’s blood,
Inquired of them: “ Why did that countless host
Prove impotent upon the day of battle ? ”’

A counsellor replied: ‘ We held the foe
To be but weak, but none will see in time
Of action such another cavalier
As brave Bahram Chubina. Not one man
For every century of ours had he,
Yet not a youth of his brave troops was wounded,
For God directed him! I might say more,
But thou hast heard enough.”’

On this Parmuda

Reflected on Bahram Chubina’s deeds,
Was wroth, turned pale of cheek, and was resolved
In his distress of heart to battle on.
A hundred thousand of the host remained—
All men of name and ready for the fray.
He led his army plain-ward from the camp
Toward the Jihun in order to avenge
His noble father on Bahram Chubjina.

What time the letter of that paladin
Came to the Shah of ardent soul that world-lord
Was sitting on his throne and holding forth
Concerning his own fortune to the court :—
“* Strange! that no tidings of Bahram Chubina

Google

C. 1829
<pb n="132"/>
132 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Have reached our court! What say ye, and hence-
forth
What shall we do? We must advise thereon.”
Now as he spake the words the chamberlain
Came from the gate and brought the king of kings
The glad news: ‘‘ May the Shah rejoice for ever !
Bahram Chubina hath prevailed o’er Sawa,
And grown the lustre of the world in fight.”’
At once the Shah called in the messenger
Sent by Bahram Chubina, seating him
Above the nobles present, and inquired
Concerning host and paladin and those
Illustrious and glorious warriors.
The messenger replied: ‘‘ Exalted Shah !
The battle went as thou didst wish. Mayst thou
Live ever happily and joyously,
For thy foe’s fortune hath grown old. The heads
Both of king Sawa and his younger son—
Him whom his father used to call Faghfur—
Are at thy gate on spears—a sight for all
The city.”
Hearing this, the king of kings
Rose, quickly bowed, and standing in God’s presence
Said: “*O Thou righteous Guide! Thou hast des-
troyed
Our foes, Thou Fashioner of sun and moon!
Great was my wretchedness and my despair
What time the foe came headlong from his throne !
*Twas neither chieftain nor the warrior-host
That did this, but God’s goodness to His slave.”’
Then from the treasures that his sire had left
He had a hundred thousand drachms brought forth,
With one third first gave largess to the poor,
But the more part to his own servitors,
And sent the Fanes of Fire another third,
There to be given over to the priests

Google

<pb n="133"/>
HURMUZD 133

To grace the Feasts of New Year and of Sada.
With what was left men sought out and repaired
The ruined sites and caravansaries
In desert places, rendering the roads
Secure and easy. He remitted imposts
For four years to the poor, and subject kings,
And then had letters written to each province,
To all the nobles, thus: “‘ Bahram Chubina
Hath triumphed o’er the foe and with his sword
Cut off king Sawa’s head.”
The Shah next passed
Two weeks in prayer; then when the world’s light
rose ,

He called the envoy of the paladin,
And seated him rejoicing ’mongst the lords ;
Then wrote an answer instantly and set
A tree within the garth of majesty,
Sent too a silver throne and golden boots,
And wealth of all sorts. All that lay between
Haital and the great river! he bestowed
On that bold paladin? and bade: “‘ Distribute
Spoil ta’en on way and waste among the troops
Except king Sawa’s private property ;
Let that be sent to court. This done, make war
Upon Parmiuda till he is o’erthrown.”’

Hurmuzd sent gifts too to the Iranians,
Confirmed by letters written to each city.
They gave the messenger a robe of honour,
And called thereafter for the nobles’ steeds.
Bahram Chubina, when the envoy came,
Joyed well content and gave the troops much booty,
Except the wealth pertaining to king Sawa,
The impure of heart; this he dispatched with horse-

men,

Famed veterans of his kin, who bore it all

1 The Oxus. * Reading with P.

Google

C. 1830
<pb n="134"/>
C. 1831

134 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

To court what while the chieftain went his way,
He and his army, to renew the fray.

§ 14
How Bahram Chiubina fought with Parmuda, Son of

King Sdwa, and overcame him, and how Parmida
took Refuge in the Hold of Awdza

Parmuda, when news came “ Bahram Chubina
Is seeking for the throne of empire,”’ held

A stronghold hight Awdza where he joyed
Secure. Therein he stored whate’er he had

Of money, jewels, and of other treasures,

And passing with his army o’er Jihun
Proceeded proudly to the seat of war.

The hosts drew near for battle, dallying not
Upon the march, and chose a fitting field

Two stages out of Balkh. Between the hosts
Two leagues of plain lay suitable for fight.

The next day brave Bahram Chubina went

To view Parmiuda’s warriors. Parmuda
Looked, saw him, and chose out upon the waste
A steep height and there ranged his host until
The plain was full. Thence he beheld a power,
Whose aspect dazed the desert, and in front
Bahram Chubina with his warlike head
Exalted to the sky, was grieved and spake,
Addressing his own troops: ‘‘ A mighty lion

Is fitting mate for this protagonist !

One cannot see the sum of his array,

But would not care to fight with them. The leader
Is proud and fierce. The dark dust under him
Will turn to blood. At night, when it is dark,
Make we a camisade and banish care

Google

Se T—o
<pb n="135"/>
HURMUZD 135

And terror from our hearts.”
Now when Parmiuda
Returned to camp he canvassed schemes for fight,
And said: “It is an excellence of theirs
That though their troops are few their horse are
splendid,

And in the chief degree of warriors,
Well armed, and have for chief Bahram Chubina,
A man to whom spears are as thorns and weeds,
With heart elate at conquering king Sawa,
And drunk with gore; vet by the Maker’s aid
I will require from that huge Mountain-mass
The vengeance owing for my father’s blood.”’

Now when Bahram Chubina left fran
To fight the Turks a reader of the stars
Said: ‘ Stir not on the Wednesday of each week,
Or harm will follow, and thy whole emprise
Prove profitless.”’

Between the hosts there lay
A garden bordered by the battlefield,
And on the Wednesday of the week at dawn
Bahram Chubina thither went and said :—
** We will be glad to-day.”’
They carried thither

Rich carpetings ; he took wine, meat, and minstrels,
And coming to that garden revelled there.
Now when a watch of darksome night had passed
The outposts brought Parmiuda the report :—
‘** Bahram Chubina revelleth in the garden.”

The chieftain chose among his warriors
‘Six thousand cavaliers, all valiant men,
And sent them forth without lights to surround
The garth and take the [ranian chiefs. Now when
Bahram Chuibina was aware thereof,
And of the plan and purpose of Parmida,
He thus addressed Yalan-sina: “ O chieftain !

Google
<pb n="136"/>
136 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

Break us a passage through the garden-wall.”’
Bahram Chubina and Izid Gashasp,
With other warriors, mounted on their steeds.

C. 1832 They issued from the breach; who knoweth how
Those warriors issued ? At the garden-gate
Arose the clarion-blare: the chieftain charged.
They quickly made a second breach and smote
The foe. Bahram Chubina, dart in hand,

And half bemused, assailed them. Few escaped him,

So eager was his drunken head for blood !

As when smiths’ hammers meet the steel so rang

The chieftains’ blows, and trunkless heads were

strewn

Between the garth and king Parmuda’s camp.
Now when Bahram Chubina had returned

To his own camp he planned a camisade,

And, midnight past, girt up his loins and Jed

His powers against the foe. Among the Turks

There was no scout that saw him. When he reached

His fighting-ground the blare of trumpets rose.

Roused in the darkness by the clarions’ din

The warrior Turks leaped up, and such a shout

As would have split a mighty lion’s ears,

Ascended.!. None knew who another was

Amid the lengthy lances and the gloom.

The frdnians made their swords flash fire and set

The earth and air ablaze. Of those brave Turks

But few were left; the stones were coralline

With blood. Like flying dust the leader fled,

Dry-mouthed and livid-lipped, and thus it was

Till dawn began to breathe and sombre night

Drew in its skirts, and then the Iranian chief

O’ertook the foe and roaring like a lion

Cried to Parmida: ‘‘O thou runaway !

Mix not henceforth with warriors. Thou’rt no man

1 Couplet omitted.

Google
<pb n="137"/>
HURMUZD 137

Of battle but a very child: ’tis fit
Thou suck thy mother’s milk.”

The king replied :—
“* How long, O ravening lion! wilt thou be
Thus keen for bloodshed ? Crocodiles in water,
And pards on land, grow satiate with the blood
Of heroes in the fight. Will naught sate thee ?
Methinketh that thou art a ravening lion,
Thou who hast stricken off king Sawa’s head—
A man beloved through life by circling heaven—
And slaughtered so his troops that sun and moon
Feel ruth for them, while as for me who am
That valiant king’s memorial, know that thou
Hast slain me too with sheer distress. We all
Are mother-born for death and have surrendered C. 1833
Our necks thereto since remedy is none.!
I flee; thou followest but wilt not take me
Till my time come. If sword in hand I turn
Upon thee either of us may be slain.
Be not so hasty and so hot of head,
For that becometh neither chief nor host.
Now will I fare to mine own tent and there
Seek to retrace my steps. I will indite
A letter to the king in fashion such
As fortune maketh needful, and if he
Accept me and protect me from attack
I will become a bondslave at his court,
And wholly banish lordship from my heart.
Put from thee war and strife. Thou camest to
fight ;
Now feast in all good will.”

Bahram Chubina,
On hearing this, turned back, for that curst foe
Had grown so gracious. When the troops had

rested,

1 Couplet omitted.

Google
<pb n="138"/>
C. 1834

138 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

And come to king Parmiuda’s camp, they fared
About the field, cut off the chieftains’ heads,

And heaped them till the pile grew mountain-like :
The hero’s men of name called it Bahram Tal.
Whate’er they saw of horsemen’s equipage,

And other booty, they assembled there.

Bahram Chubina wrote the king a letter
About Parmiuda and his countless host,
Narrating “ all that hath befallen us
Both from the Turks and from their warlike king,
Whose heart was eager to avenge his sire,

And who departed to Awaza hence.”

Parmida, on his side, made fast the hold,
And sat down deep in thought, while in pursuit
Came countless troops and circled it about ;
But though so many leaguered it none knew
Parmida’s plans. Bahram Chubina said :—

‘““ The toils of war are better than delay,

And so he told Yal-an-sina to choose

Three thousand of the horsemen on the field,
And further that [zid Gashasp should call

To horse four thousand warriors of the troops.
He bade behead forthwith all whom they found,
Thus haply from the hold the king to draw
When all the waste a-stream with blood he saw.

§15
How Bahram Chibina sent a Message to Parmida

and how Parmida asked Quarter

Bahram Chubina stayed before the hold
Three days but sent at sun-rise on the fourth

1 Tal is a heap or mound.

Google
<pb n="139"/>
HURMUZD 139

This message to Parmida as the chief

Both of the realm and race: ‘ O noble king

Of Chin and of the Turks! why hast thou chosen

To occupy this stronghold ? Where are now

King Sawa’s passion to possess the world,

And all his treasure, power, and elephants,

His armour for the steeds and ardent chiefs ?

Where are thy witchcraft and thy sorcery

That now thou dost seclude thyself ? Time was

When all the Turks’domain was not enough

For thee, thy father peerless in the world.

Now womanlike thou sittest in this hold,

With full heart, beating thine own head. Undo

The castle-gate, seek quarter, ask of me

To plead for thee before my king. Dispatch

Thy treasures of dinars and all thy purses

From this hold plain-ward or if thou keep them

Keep not the realm for kings despise dinars.

Myself will intercede for thee at court

Because I am the champion of [ran ;

Thee will I make chief of all chiefs and treat thee

Above thine aims and thine imaginings.

Now if thou hast some hidden policy,

One that will make thy gloomy prospects bright,

Confide in me; since thine affairs are thus

Be not thou distant. I have given thee quarter,

As thou dost know, and opened thee a way

To scape by, else thou hadst been lifeless now,

As is thy sire, and seen not son or kindred :

But if thou hast companions for the fight,

With treasure and abundance of dinars,

Exert thyself herein and take revenge,

For troops are not to seek where there is treasure.’
The messenger arriving told his message,

Which when Parmida, the ambitious, heard

He answered: “Say: ‘ If so thou canst forbear

>

Google
<pb n="140"/>
C. 1835

140 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

To search out this world’s secrets. Thou perchance
Hast made too bold therewith because thy toils
Have brought forth fruit ; yet in thy victory
Joy not; though thou art young the world is old.
The secret of the turning sky is known

To none; it never showeth us its face.

To mock becometh not a general.

I too had soldiers, elephants, and drums,

But heaven above is practised in deceit,

So couple not thy heart with arrogance.

My sire, the world-lord, that discerning man,
Whom thou beheldest on the day of fight,

Had earth as bondslave of his horse’s hoofs,
And heaven revolved according to his will ;

Yet sought he what it was not his to seek,

And turned not from his wrongful purposes.

His prowess is o’erlaid by ridicule,

And enemies bemock him from afar.

As for thy saying that thy host exceedeth

The revolutions of the sun and moon

In sum, and that thy steeds and elephants
Seem grass-seeds scattered by a wind-mill’s sails,
All that will pass away and thou withal

Wilt cease to joy and to illume the world.

Fear sharp fate’s vengeance yet ;! it may infuse
Some of its bane in this thine antidote.

When one hath made a trade of shedding blood,
And harassing the hearts of enemies,

Men will shed his blood also by the token

That he hath shed the blood of other chiefs.
Wreck though thou mayst the country of the Turks
Still in the end they will exact revenge.

If I shall come to thee forthwith I fear

That thou wilt make an end of me. Thou art
A slave; Iama king. Shall I abase me

1“ Crains le sort, quiséme la vengeance."’ Mohl.

Google
<pb n="141"/>
HURMUZD I41

Before a thrall ? I will not come to battle

Without a host or those that wish me well

Will call me mad ; but it is no disgrace

For me to ask for quarter from thy Shah

In mine extremity. When that is done

The hold, the treasure, and the men are thine ;

Thy wishes will be law in this famed land.’ ”’
The messenger returned with this reply ;

Bahram Chubina was rejoiced thereby.

§16

How Bahram Chibina asked of Hurmuzd a Warrant
to spare the Life of Parmida and the Answer

They wrote a letter that might bear good fruit
To that victorious and exalted Shah :—
** The Khan of Chin is suppliant for quarter ;
He is beleaguered by Bahram Chubina,
And needeth a safe-conduct under seal ;
The news thereof will be a feast to him.
Now since the suppliant is the Khan of Chin,
Fall’n from such dignity to wretchedness,
The king of kings should pity one whose worship
Hath passed away.”
Now when the letter reached
The Shah he cloudward raised his glorious crown.
He sent and summoned the [ranians,
And set them by the famous throne of kingship,
Bade read the letter and strew gems upon
The reader, saying: ‘I thank my God and praise
Him
Three watches of the night in that the Khan
Of Chin is now our subject and high heaven

Google

C. 1836
<pb n="142"/>
142 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Our crown. He raised his head to touch the sky,
And thought himself the monarch of the world ;
But now this leader who attacked our coasts
Is made the slave of one still mightier,
And so the Turks’ chief and the prince of Chin
Is offering his homage unto us.
Praise to the Ruler of the sun and moon,
The Source of this supremacy of ours.
Do ye too offer praise to God and be
More instant in the practice of all good.”

He called the envoy of the paladin,
Gave him a long and gracious interview,
Called for a girdle set with royal gems,
A kingly robe of honour and a steed
With trappings decked with gold and every buckle
Bejewelled. To the messenger withal
He gave dinars, a purse, and much beside
To be a present to that prudent man,?
Whom he held chief among the paladins,
Bade come a scribe and had a letter written
On silk: “‘ Parmuda Khan is mine ally,
And in all regions under my protection.
God is the witness to this deed and seal ;
His slaves are we and He is Lord.”’

He wrote

An answer also to that world-aspirant,*
A letter all good will like Paradise,
And said: “‘ Dispatch Parmuda to my court
With all observance but without his host.
The booty that thou tookest from his troops—
A service which thou didst right zealously—
Send thither too, whate’er of it is worthy.
The Maker aideth thee. Spy out the foe,
And if he hath a stronghold let thy guards
Seize and consume it through thy glorious fortune,

1 Couplet omitted.  * Bahram Chubina. ° Td.

Google
<pb n="143"/>
HURMUZD 143

And world-illuming presages. If thou

Hast need of further troops they shall be thine,
And there shall be addition to thy treasures.
State thy demands in writing; we will send
Whatever troops are needed. In thy letter
Name those [rdnians that have acted well

In thine esteem; their toils shall be rewarded.
Thy troops the guardians of the march shall be ;
The crown of paladins I give to thee.”’

§17

How Hurmuzd’s Letter granting Quarter to Parmiuda
reached Bahrdm Chiubina, and how Bahram
Chibina was wroth with Parmida

Now when this letter reached the paladin

That famous chieftain’s heart grew young; the
letter

Astounded him. He sent and called the [ranians,

And showed the Shah’s gifts; all that saw them
blessed him.

He showed the [Iranians too all that Hurmuzd

Had written of them. The warriors acclaimed ;

Thou wouldst have said: ‘“‘ Earth’s surface shook.”’
He sent too

The honourable safe-conduct for Parmuda,

Giv’n by the monarch, to the hold to him ;

His darkened soul grew bright. With many blessings

Upon the king he left his famous fortress,

And leaving to Bahram Chubina all

The wealth therein made ready to depart.

Descending from the hold the proud Parmuda

Bestrode his charger swift as flying dust,

Google

C. 1837
<pb n="144"/>
C. 1838

144 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And set forth with his troops without regard

To bold Bahram Chubina who chagrined

Thereat, and though his captive was a king,

Sent after him and had him brought afoot,

And running in the presence of the troops ;

Then said to him indignantly: “ Are such

Your manners in Turan and Chin—to go

Without leave asked of me? Sheer folly this!”
Parmuda said: ‘‘ Once I was raised o’er folk,

But now am humbled and a suppliant,

Cast vilely from the zenith of my power.

To-day withal thou art not generous

In bringing me before thee, evil one!

Now that I have the letter of safe-conduct

I purpose going to the king. Perchance

He will receive me brother-like ; misfortune

May grow more light to me. What wouldst thou

more ?

I have surrendered fortune, home, and goods.”

Bahram Chubina raged with flashing eyes
In indignation at Parmuda’s words,
And struck him in excitement with a whip—
Behaviour only fit for miscreants.
They bound Parmuda’s feet forthwith and made
A scanty tent his prison. Said thereat
Kharrad, son of Barzin: “ This paladin
And wisdom are not mates! ”’

He sought the archscribe,

And said: “ This mighty paladin possesseth
Not one gnat’s wing of wisdom !! so he taketh
No heed of any one, and we must go,
And say to him: ‘* This is remediless.’
His temper is his great calamity.”

The two departed to Bahram Chubina
With pallid cheeks and counsel on their tongues,

1 Reading with P.

Google

a A A ET ee ee ee oe ttt i’ 2382 qe eee aoe’ Pee
<pb n="145"/>
HURMUZD 145

And told him: “ Thou hast given to the winds
Thy toil! Oh! be that noble head of thine
Unfilled with fire ! ”’

Ware of his foul behaviour,
That into water had been flung a brick
Already dried, he in his penitence
Released the Khan and was in great concern.
He sent the Khan a steed with golden trappings,
And Indian falchion with a golden scabbard,
Moreover went forthwith to him to make
His dark soul bright, there tarried till the Khan
Had armed and mounted on a speedy steed,
And then escorted him upon his way,
Perceiving that the prince’s visage loured.
When it was time to part Bahram Chuibina
Told him: “ Thou hast a secret grudge against me ;
Yet, though it be so, tell it not the Shah ;
No credit will result to thee therefrom.”

The Khan replied to him: “ It is of fortune

That I complain ; I leave it all to God.
I am not such an one as would desire
To speak in many words of other men ;
Still if thy monarch hath no news hereof
He is not worthy of his high estate.

It was the turning sky that fettered me ;
I tell not of ill usage from a slave.”’

Thereat Bahram Chubina paled ; he writhed,
But with an effort swallowed down his wrath,
And thus returned reply: “ An instance this
Of what the famous nobles used to say :—

‘ Forbear thine utmost seed of ill to cast,
For time will give thee fruit thereof at last.’}
To what end did I deck for thee my heart,
Attempt to do thee kindness in the world,
And wrote its lord a letter hiding all

1 Couplet omitted.
VOL, VIII, K

Google
<pb n="146"/>
C. 1839

146 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Thine own shortcomings ? ”
‘“* That,” the Khan rejoined,

*““ Is past, and all the past hath turned to wind.
By God! I do not owe thee any grudge,
Or cherish in my heart the former strife.
Thy kindness hath been greater than this wrong,
And thou didst guide me on the way to good ;
But just as there is insolence in war,
So is there courtesy in time of peace,
And if the two are all the same to thee
Thy wisdom out of question is but small,
And when a leader is too wise to take
His lord’s commands then evil will befall him.
Moreover one should tread God’s path and purge
All darkness from the heart. °*Twere well for thee
To say no more for past ill is but wind.”

On hearing this Bahram Chubina said :—
* Methought ’twould out, but no mishap will come
Of thy complaint for I will hide it up
With painted silk. On thine arrival say
Whate’er thou wilt ; *twill minish not my lustre.”’

The Khan said: “ Every king that taketh not
Account of good and ill, but passeth over
His slave’s misdeeds in silence, be assured
Is witless, and when malcontents afar—
Allies or other kings—observe this thing
They will term thee unseemly and light-headed,
And him the foolish monarch of [ran.”’

Bahram Chubina paled, and when Kharrad,
Son of Barzin, had taken note thereof
He feared that, wrathful and bloodthirsty man
Would hurl Parmuda from his steed to dust,
And said: ‘“‘O general of the Shah! repress
Thy wrath and quit that path because the Khan
Saith well, so list to him and think no ill,
For had cool words ne’er passed the hearts of neither

Google

- oo Te
<pb n="147"/>
HURMUZD 147

Would have been pained.”
** This ill-conditioned one,”’
Bahram Chubina said, “* would join his sire.”
The Khan said: ‘‘ Wrong me not. Reft as Iam
Of mine own father I may well die young.
All those that in the world are like thyself,
With heads all dust-cloud and with hearts all fume,
Imagine ill, accord to none, but raise
Themselves by craft and cruelty. I fear not
The king of kings; from him bale or relief
Is well. He is my peer among the great,
And not a slave malignantly disposed
Towards me, but is gentle, wise, high-born,
And greatly mindful of the men of name.
I charge thee by the soul and by the head
Of Shah Hurmuzd that thou return forthwith.
Give me no more replies and insolence ;
Say naught and hear naught.”’
When Bahram Chubina
Heard he returned to camp in vengeful mood,
And thus that proven warrior harangued
The prudent chiefs: ‘‘ Kharrad, son of Barzin,
And those wise men, the archscribe and _ arch-
mages,
Shall write a letter to the world’s king, telling
All that hath passed in public and in private.”
The general said further to the chief
And other archimages: “ Men of wisdom!
Depart hence to the hold, be diligent,
Companion with the wind and ascertain
What quantity of wealth is hoarded there.”’
With fearful hearts the scribes set forth. From
dawn
Until three watches of the night had passed
They blacked much paper but they had not done.
There was not room to move for precious things,

Google

C. 1840
<pb n="148"/>
148 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Hoards of the era of Afrasiyab,

And of Arjasp, so ancient yet unspent,

Gold coins and jewels won from sea and mine

By favour of the sky; such were the treasures

Within Awaza hold world-famous then.

Among the goods of Siyawush came first

A belt with jewelled buckles and such earrings

As no one high or low besides possessed,

Which Kai Khusrau had given Luhrasp and he

Thereafter gave them to Gushtasp. Arjasp

Gat them and stored them there, none knoweth
when.

They wrote a list of all the precious things

That were laid up within the treasury,

But no one in the world, astrologer,

Or noble prince had knowledge of the sum.

Bahram Chubina sent a scribe, a man

Shrewd, eloquent, and mindful, who collected

The booty from the hold and battlefield.

There were a pair of earrings in the spoil,

And pair of boots with patterns formed by gems ;

The stuff was interwoven with gold threads

Bestrung with precious stones. There were withal

Two gold-embroidered curtains from Yaman,

Whereof each one was seven mans? in weight.

Now through presumption and perversity

The captain of the host, contemplating

No scrutiny, put secretly aside

The pairs of boots and curtains of Yaman,

And made no entry of them in his list.

He then gave orders to Izid Gashasp

That he and all his cavaliers should mount,

Select a thousand warriors from the host,

And take the booty to the monarch’s gate.

The warriors having mounted on their steeds,
1 See Vol. 1., p. 290 note.

Google
<pb n="149"/>
HURMUZD 149

Izid Gashasp bore off that mass of spoil,
And full of joy and merriment they took

A hundred caravan-loads to fran.

Irdnian horsemen closed the long array,
The Khan with his own nobles led the way.

§ 18

Hew Parmida came before Hurmuzd with the
Treasures sent by Bahrdm Chiubina

With treasure, gifts, and troops the Khan drew near

The monarch of the world who heard and mounted

With crown on head and mace in hand, and thus

Came to the gate. When from the porch he saw

The visage of the Khan he paused to note

If at the sight of him that prince and troops

Would light down from their steeds. Parmuda
watched,

Full of concern, if he would turn away,

Then, mounted still, came with the archimage,

Izid Gashasp, whereat the Shah, the world-lord,

Bestirred him with his troops. The Khan alighted

And hastened toward the Shah, without delay

Remounting his black Arab, while the Great King

Abode not with Parmiuda in the porch,

And rode his fleet steed off; but when the Khan

Was following, the keeper of the curtain

Laid hold upon his reins forthwith. Parmuda

Alighted instantly and manifested

His own diplomacy by that submission.

Now when the Khan approached the royal throne

The king of kings received him with all favour,

And having welcomed set him in the presence,

Repenting of the past hostility.

They lodged him fitly in the pleasant palace

Google

C. 1841
<pb n="150"/>
C. 1842

130 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Prepared for him and brought whate’er he needed.
A scribe was charged to lodge the retinue
Hard by. The Shah, on hearing of the wealth
Brought by Parmida, sent it to the park,
And charged therewith the keeper of the camels.
The eighth day, when Parmiuda was refreshed
From all his toils, the Shah ordained a feast,
And, when the Khan was seated at the board
At court and in the presence of the world-lord,
Bade bring the camel-loads before the chiefs.
One counted up the porters; on that day
There were ten thousand hired. The next, at dawn,
Hurmuzd had wine set forth and took his seat,
And from the park came fifty thousand bales
As well as parcels on the porters’ backs.
The baggage filled a hundred treasuries.
The Shah, when his task was achieved, bade bring
Before the presence publicly a bale
Of stuffs, bejewelled earrings, and a girdle
Compact, thou wouldst have said, of gold and gems. )
These he bestowed with many words of praise
Upon the messenger who kissed the ground,
While from the banquet-hall arose acclaim :—
‘** Victorious be the Shah.”
He at that time

Said to his confidant Izid Gashasp :—
‘* What seest thou in Bahram Chubina’s exploit ?
He maketh war to cease right manfully.”’

The scribe Izid Gashasp replied: ‘‘ O Shah,
Who art observant and of ardent mind !
When at a feast the theme is such know there
Will likewise be but ill-conditioned fare.’*?

'! Perhaps we ought to read ’’ Ayin Gashasp " here and below.
See pp. 75, 174 seq.

* With changes of reading Mohl translates : ‘‘ sache que les mets
d'une féte ou c’est Ie mot corneille (djoubin) qui forme le refrain
doivent étre étranges.”’

Google
<pb n="151"/>
HURMUZD 151

The Shah became suspiciously inclined
On hearing this ; misdoubtings filled his mind.

$19

How Hurmuzd heard of the Ill-doing of Bahram
Chiibina and made a Compact unth the Khan

Then came a lusty camel-post and brought
This letter from the archscribe: “‘ May the world-
lord

Be ever joyful and his head and crown
For ever present in his servant’s thoughts.
Know that there were two curtains of Yaman
Among the spoil, boots decked with gems uncut,
The earrings too of noble Siyawush,
Who left us wisdom as his monument,
And these the paladin bare off with him?
No marvel since he underwent the toil.”

Hurmuzd said to Parmtda: “ Tell me all
That thou didst see hereof.”

The fallen king
Confirmed the scribe’s report. The haughty Shah
Was wroth thereat and said: “ Bahram Chubina
Doth err, uplifting to the moon his head.
For one thing he hath struck the Khan of Chin—-
An act the outcome of an evil nature—
And then would nothing but these earrings serve
His turn ? Perhaps he hath become a king.
His toil hath turned to wind and all his knowledge
And justice have become corrupt.”
This said,

He called the Khan and having seated him
Upon the famous throne they feasted there

» Reading with P.

Google
<pb n="152"/>
152 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Till night spread out her musky tresses black.
C. 1843 Then said the Shah: ‘ If thou wilt league with me
Thou shalt partake my honey.”
As he sat
He grasped the Khan‘s hand, and Parmida mar-
velled.
The Shah proceeded: “ Swear to me afresh,
And make a new departure, not to break
With me or with the nobles of this folk
On thy return.”
Parmuda swore forthwith :—
‘* By shining daylight and night azure-dim,
By God who hath of right supremacy,
The Artificer of Jupiter and Venus,
The great Shah’s crown and throne, Azargashasp,
The signet and the diadem, the Khan
Shall not grow alien from the Shah in heart,
And vex him not in aught.”
This sworn, they rose
And sought their couches.
When the yellow sun
O’er-topped the mountains, and the kings awoke,
The noble Shah prepared a present—ware
Of gold and silver, horses, coronets,
Of girdles gemmed and golden, armlets, torques,
And earrings, Arab steeds with golden trappings,
And Indian seimitars with golden sheaths,
Dispatched them to the Khan, consorted with him
Two stages and the more part of the third,
And having bidden him farewell returned.
The paladin, on hearing of the gifts
Presented by the monarch of the world,
And how the Khan was coming back rejoicing,
Rode forth to meet him with the Iranian chiefs.
He stored provisions where the Khan would pass
In town and village, station, hill, and plain,

Google
<pb n="153"/>
HURMUZD 153

And hurried on in shame at his ill temper
To make excuse in person. When he saw
Parmiuda he did reverence but the Khan
Proved wholly adverse, would accept of naught
That he had brought of provand, purse, or slave,
And on the way ignored him utterly.
Bahram Chubina fared three stages thus,
And not once did Parmiida call for him.
Upon the fourth the Khan sent one to say :—
** Return for thou hast toiled enough.”

Thereat
Bahram Chubina left him and in wrath
Set face toward Balkh where he abode in dudgeon,
Repenting of his acts with aching heart.
Withal the world-lord was displeased with him,
And fumes of anger filled the monarch’s soul
First at that outrage to the Khan wherein
Bahram Chubina had done shamefully.
And next that he had dared to lay his hand
On certain of the spoil without command.

§ 20

How Hurmuzd wrote a chiding Letter to Bahrdm
Chibina and sent him a Distaff-case, Cotton, and
Women’s Raiment

The king then wrote thus to Bahram Chubina :—

** Unconscionable div! perceiv’st thou not

That all our excellencies are from God,

And yet thou sittest on the vault of heaven ?

Hast thou forgot my pains, troops, toil, and treasure ?
Thou keepest not the way of paladins,

Google

C. 1844
<pb n="154"/>
C. 1845

154 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

But raisest thy head skyward. Thou hast turned
From my behest and acted otherwise.
Here is the robe of honour meet for thee,
Agreeable and appropriate to thine acts.”’

The Shah, when he had sealed this, ordered one
To bring him a black distaff-case with distaff
And cotton, much unworthy gear, withal
A blue silk shift, red drawers, and yellow coif,
Chose an ignoble messenger to match
With that unseemly gift and said: “ Convey
These to Bahram Chubina. Say to him :—
‘O worthless miscreant ! thou didst bind the Khan,
And gloat upon great men’s mishaps, but I
Will fetch thee from thy seat and hold thee naught
Henceforth.’ ”’

The messenger, these words in mind,

Departed with the gift and went like wind.

§ 21
How Bahram Chibina put on the Woman's Dress
and showed himself therein to the Chiefs of the Host

Whenas Bahram Chubina saw the present

Sent with the letter he endured in silence.

He thought: “ This is my guerdon! So the Shah
Is now my foe though he hath not devised

This wrong but mine ill-wishers slandered me.

The world-lord is the master of his slaves,

And if he putteth me to shame ’tis well.

I did not think that enemies of mine

Had access to the Shah. Since I left court

In haste with but few troops all men have witnessed
My deeds, my sorrows and my toils and hardships.

Google
<pb n="155"/>
HURMUZD

If these toils are rewarded by a shame

That is the portion of the infamous

I will complain of circling heaven to God

For having docked me thus of all its love.”
He called upon the Judge that giveth good,

Then, having donned the red and vellow garb,

And set before him the black spindle-case,

And all the other things sent by the Shah,

He summoned to him all the mighty men,

The nobles of the monarch of the world.

These came forth from the army to the chief,

Whose gloomy soul was full of anxious thoughts.

They came, both young and old, were all astound,

And mused, on seeing their paladin so clad.
He said: ‘‘ A robe of honour from the Shah !
Ye saw and heard of what I did and how
I combated with my two-headed dart.
The Shah despaired about the royal throne ;
The world was dark and I illumined it.
I have put on me this repugnant garb
According to the exalted king’s command.
The Shah is world-lord and we are his slaves,
Our hearts and souls are full of love for him.
What are your views, ye witnesses ! herein ?
What answer make we to the king of earth ?”’

All cried: ‘“‘ Famed paladin and worshipful !
If this be thy worth with the Shah the troops
Are dogs at court! Note what the ancient sage
Observed at Rai when angry with Ardshir :—
‘I grow averse from archmage and Shah’s throne
When he regardeth not my weal and woe.’
How canst thou seek for honour from a man
That honoureth not thee ? ”

He said: “ Forbear :

The Shah is source of honour to his troops ;
His slaves are we; he giveth, we receive.”

Google
<pb n="156"/>
C. 1846

156 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

The frdnians said: ‘‘ We will not arm_hence-
forth ;
We will not have him in fran as Shah,
Or, as our general, Bahram Chitibina.”’
They spake and went forth from his presence,
left
The palace of the chieftain! for the plain,
But he refrained his lips and at the most
Gave only prudent counsels to the host.

§ 29

How Bahram Chibina went to hunt and saw a Lady
who foretold the Future to him

Two weeks passed, then Bahram Chubina left
His palace for the waste. In front of him
There was a forest furnished well with trees —
The very place for lucky revellers.
Upon the mead he saw an onager,
And none will see a fairer one. He followed
At leisure, heating not his steed. Appeared
Within that woodland-chase a narrow path,
Which when that gallant onager had traversed
A pleasance next was seen upon the plain.
Bahram Chuibina, marking this, proceeded
Until a splendid palace came in sight.
Led by the onager he turned and rode
Thereto ; behind him was Izid Gashasp,
To whom he gave his fleet steed’s reins and said :—
‘*“ May wisdom ever be thy mate,’ then entered
The porch alone. [zid Gashasp the while
Abode without and held the noble steed.
Behind him hurrying came Yalan-sina

1 Reading with P.

Google

—_
<pb n="157"/>
HURMUZD 157

Armed on a swift horse. Brave Izid Gashasp
Said: “ Lion! enter thou and find out whither
Our chief, the heroic captain of the host,
Our succourer, hath gone.”

Yalan-sina
Made for the palace with an anxious heart
To seek the chief. He saw it and its hall
Magnifical ; its like he had not seen
Or heard of in fran. Upon one side
Thereof there was a cupola whose top
Was viewless through its height and under it
A throne of gold with steps begemmed. The throne
Was covered with brocade of Rum in patterns
Picked out with jewels on a ground of gold.
Upon the throne there sat a lady crowned,
Of cypress-height and with a face like Spring.
Beside it was a seat and thereupon
The captain of the host while many slaves,
Idols fay-faced and blooming, were around.
On seeing Yalan-sina the Jady bade
A handmaid: ‘“ Hasten to yon lion-heart,
Fair mate, and say: * Thou mayst not enter here.
Stay with thy comrades. He will come anon,
But go thou first. As from Bahram Chubina
Speak this and ease them as to his return.’ ”’

She sent some also to his retinue

To bring the warriors’ horses to the stalls,
And take good care of all their equipage.
The gardener unlocked the garden-gate
By hest of that fair hostess,? and they set
About the garden victuals past conceit.
Whenas the warriors had eaten bread
They led the chargers to the place assigned.
Bahram Chubina, when he left the lady,
Spake thus: “ May Jupiter espouse thy crown.”

1 Three couplets omitted. * One couplet omitted.

Google

C. 1847
<pb n="158"/>
C. 1848

158 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

She answered: “ Be victorious and ever
Of patient heart and wise. Go thou! the throne
And the Iranian diadem are thine.
The world shall be set straight by thee, so win it
By might and sword from dark dust to the stars.’”?

Now when he came forth from that garth of roses
Thou wouldst have said: ‘* He weepeth blood !”’

So changed
Was he in temper and in talk that thou
Hadst said: ‘‘ He raiseth to the Pleiades
His head.”
Anon the onager appeared ;
The chieftain followed after on his steed,
And it was so that till he cleared the forest
The onager still served him as a guide.
He went back to the city from the chace,
But spake not of the matter to the host.
Kharrad, son of Barzin, regarded him
And said thus: * O thou chief that speakest sooth !
What was this marvel seen and heard by none
That happened in the chace ? ”
The paladin

Vouchsafed no answer but in dudgeon sought
The palace, and none else dared ask: ‘* What might
This matter mean, this vision of delight ? ”’

§ 23

Hou Bahrém Chibina assumed the royal Style and
how Kharrdd, Son of Barzin, and the Archscribe®

fied

The next day, when the uplands silvered over,
And when yon yellow shining Lamp appeared,

1 Jd. °*IJd.  * Izid Gashasp in the original. C/. p. 106.

Google
<pb n="159"/>
HURMUZD 159

Bahram Chubina spread a carpeting
Made of brocade of Chin, and thou hadst said
That earth had turned to sky. Throughout the
palace

He ranged gold seats and cushions of brocade
Of gold. They placed a golden ante-throne
Whereon the captain of the host sat down,
Then held a session like the king of kings,
And placed upon his head the crown of greatness.

The archscribe marked Bahram Chubina’s con-

duct,
And, knowing him to be both bold and strong,
Went and retailed his knowledge, sight or hearsay,
Before Kharrad, son of Barzin, who listened,
Knew that his own toils had been vain, and said :—
** Take not this ightly, O thou noble scribe !
This king of kings of ours hath played the fool
In sending as a gift the distaff-case,
Not knowing that this battle-loving Lion
Would thus revolt. We must not talk of this,
But when ’tis midnight fare forth to the Shah,
And say: * Bahram Chubina’s heart is set
Upon the crown; the seat too under him
Is ivory.’ ”’
They canvassed all the case,

And made a shift to flee, prepared the pretext,
And fled from Balkh by night. The chief, informed
Thereof, and knowing well their clear, shrewd minds,
Said to Yalan-sina: “ Go in pursuit
Of those two dotards with a hundred horse.”

He overtook the archscribe, raged at him,
As ’twere a wolf, took from him all he had,
And brought him back made fast in heavy bonds,
Back to Bahram Chubina so that he
Might slay the innocent. The paladin
Said : “‘ Doer of div’s work ! why didst thou quit me

Google
<pb n="160"/>
C. 1849

160 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Without my leave ? ”’
“*O paladin !’’ he answered,
** Kharrad, son of Barzin, made me afraid.
He said: ‘ We may not tarry; thy delay
Will please those only that speak ill of thee,
For when the heroic captain of the host,
Bahram Chubina, holdeth court as Shah
There is a fear lest thou and I be slain
Save we return.’ ”’
Bahram Chubina said :—

** Just so: one must consult o’er good and ill.”’

He then restored and with advantages
From his own treasures what the scribe had lost,
Then said to him: “ Go thou and ponder o’er
Thy conduct in this case and flee no more.”’

§ 24

How Hurmuzd received News of Bahrdm Chubina’s
Doings, and how Bahram Chiubina sent a Frail
of Swords to Hurmuzd

Kharrad, son of Barzfn, for his part rode,
Escaping notice,till he reached the Shah,

To whom he told his news, suppressing naught,
Of wood and meadow, course of onager,

Strait pathway and Bahram Chubina’s sojourn ;
Told of the palace and the jewelled throne,

The slave-girls and the lady with the crown :
He told whatever he had seen and heard.

The Shah mused at the tale, laid it to heart,
And sighed as he remembered what the archmage
And fortune-teller had said: ‘“‘ Bahram Chuibina
Will turn him from thy throne.’”!

1 See pp. 107, 108,

Google

<pb n="161"/>
HURMUZD 161

Forthwith he summoned
The high priest, set Kharrad, son of Barzin,
Within the room and said to him: “ Relate
The adventures of thy journey.”’
Thus enjoined
He oped his lips and told it all. The Shah
Said to the high priest: “‘ What importeth this ?
We must consult at large. The onager
That led him through the wood, the palace seen
Amidst the wilderness, the lady crowned
Upon the golden throne, the slaves in waiting
As on a queen—the account is like a dream
Suggested by old tales !”’ |
The high priest thus
Made answer to the monarch of the world :—
‘“* Beneath that onager there was a div
Who sought to lead Bahram Chubina wrong,
And make perverseness show within his heart.
The palace, be assured, was sorcerer’s work,
The lady on the throne an impious witch,
Who on this wise to hearten him the more
Displayed the crown and throne of majesty.
All eager and bemused he went from her : C. 1850
Be sure that he will ne’er come back to hand.
His heart was wounded by thy distaff-case,
And going to that div-witch made it worse.
It was not well to send the ignoble robe
To one so overweening, for thereby
The frdnians were estranged and ceased to trust
The king of kings. So now devise a scheme
To bring the army back to court from Balkh.”’
The king repented having acted so
About the cotton and the gaudy dress,
And asked Kharrad, son of Barzin: ‘‘ What say
The troops there of that lady ? ”’
He replied :—

VOL. VIII. I.

Google
<pb n="162"/>
C. 185!

162 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

“* As for that crownédd lady, all the troops
Call her, O king! * Bahram Chubina’s Luck,’
Which will be very great and glorious.”

The king, on hearing, greatly feared the ills
That fortune had in store. Ere long there came
One from the paladin, the cavalier,
And brought a frail of swords with points all bent.}
He set them down before the Shah who looked
Upon that iron gear, bade break the swords,
Replace them in that ill-conditioned frail,
And then return them to Bahram Chubina:
No word was spoken but the intent was clear.
Bahram Chubina oped the frail, beheld
The long swords snapped at point and then replaced,
And, wayward as he was, grew full of thought.
He called the franians round the frail and said :—
** Behold the king’s gift! Underrate it not.
It meaneth that this host is little worth,
And not the head of one of us will scape.”’

The troops thought much of what the Shah had

done,
And of their paladin’s address. They said :—
‘“‘One day our monarch sendeth us as gifts
A distaff and a gaudy robe; anon
He giveth broken swords—a present worse
Than striking or abuse. Ne’er be such Shah
Upon the throne! May none remember him,
And if again the offspring of Gashasp—
Bahram Chubina—ride on that court’s dust
Then may they perish, skin and marrow both,
He and his worthless sire ! ”’
The chieftain heard,

Saw how Hurmuzd had vexed the host and said :—
‘* Be vigilant and let your minds be clear
Because Kharrid, son of Barzin, hath told

1 par usage qu'on en avait fatt dans la bataille.”” Mohl.

Google
<pb n="163"/>
HURMUZD 163

Our secrets to the king. Let each consult
His safety and conspire with me to-day.

If I send none to watch our enemies

Regard my days as done, my soldiers slain.”’

He spake and took new order: mark and muse.
He scattered horsemen through the realm lest letters,
Sent by the king, should reach the [ranians,

And they should arm themselves to fight for him,
And so it wes that till a time had gone
A royal letter was perused by none.

§ 25

How Bahrdm Chibina made known to the Chiefs his
Designs upon the Throne, and how his Sister
Gurdya advised him

Bahram Chubina summoned then the chiefs,

And told them many secrets. There were present
Hamdan Gashasp and the archscribe, Yalan-sina,
Renowned and strong, with valorous Bahram,
The son of Siyawush, and that wise chief,

Kanda Gashasp. With these he held debate,

For they were Lions and men of war, and then
Harangued that fierce host, which was all astray,
Thus: ‘‘ Famous chiefs whose counsel all require !
The Shdh is wroth with us without a cause,

And so hath turned away from what is right.
What will ye do? What is the remedy ?

°Tis useless to shed tears upon the past.

Whoe’er hath hid his anguish from the leech
Hath showered from his lashes tears of blood,
And trifles grow in moment when we keep

Our secrets from the men of understanding.

Google
<pb n="164"/>
C. 1852

164 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

I have myself my privy griefs and I
Will tell them to the sages of the world.
Ye all are conversant with these affairs,
And so can testify to what I say.
We left fran by order of the Shah
With but few troops, though eager to engage,
And none, though long his life, will see a foe
More numerous. Now if the Turk Parmiuda,
Had, with king S4wa, marched upon [ran
It would not have been worth a piece of wax,
And later they would have attempted Rum ;
But on Parmuda and king Sawa came
A marvel such as none within the world
Had seen, and though we bare much toil ourselves
We left them neither elephants nor treasure.
The Shah hath laid up wealth anew, grown rich,
And yet he is enraged against the host
Though all the business hath been done for him,
And he is franchised through no toil of his !?
In such a coil what shift shall I employ
To set my head at ease ? Do ye too all
Shift for yourselves. What is your remedy
For such a wound ? I have discharged my heart,
And freed my soul. Respecting weal or woe
If ye are ware of any means now speak.”

He proved with these words, for he feared, the host.
Behind his curtains that famed paladin
Possessed a sister, one of ardent soul,
And that wise lady’s name was Gurdya,
Of fairy-visage and his heart’s delight.
Now she, on hearing from behind the veil
Her brother’s words, was angered ; her heart flared.
With much to say and full of instances
She came forth to that conclave, and her brother
Kept silence, when he heard her voice, from word

1 Couplet transposed.

Google
<pb n="165"/>
HURMUZD 165

And answer, and the frénians too were silent

For fear of harm. Thus Gurdya addressed

The troops: “« Illustrious men who Seek for guidance !

Why do ye hold your peace and check your spleen ?

Ye are the warrior-chieftains of frén,

Wise, prescient lords. What see ye in this matter ?

What game play ye upon this scene of blood ? ”
Then said Izid Gashasp, the cavalier :-_

‘‘ Memorial of the mighty ! were our tongues

Sharp swords they would take flight before the sea

Of thine advice. Thine acts are all of God,

Brave, learned, and wise. We need not fight like

And cavalierly counter cavaliers,
While if the paladin is pleased with me
Methinketh that I Shall be young for ever.”
Bahr4m Chubina, hearing him thus speak,
Saw that he dealt with both sides. Then he marked
Yalan-sina and said : “ What thinkest thou ? ”
Quoth he: “ Brave chief! the walker in God’s way
Will be wise, famed, and learned, will have his will
In all and, winning victory and Grace,
Will haste not to do ill for that would turn
A blessing to a curse and circling heaven
Be vengeful towards him. God hath given thee
Grace, fortune, troops withal, wealth, prowess, throne ;
If thou art grateful He will send thee more,
But through ingratitude the heart will ache.”
Then said Bahram Chibina to Bahrém -—
“ Wise friend and prudent mate! what Sayest thou
About this seeking after throne and treasure ?
Will majesty result or pain and grief ? ”
He laughed that such a case should be discussed,

Google

C. 1853
<pb n="166"/>
166 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSIT

Then tossing up his finger-ring replied :—
‘** As long as this remaineth in the air

So long shall it be servant to the Shah ;
Yet he is great ; despise him not for none
Should under-estimate the diadem.”’

Said to Kanda Gashasp! Bahram Chubina :—
**O thou sword-wielding and steed-spurring Lion !
What seest and sayst thou touching this affair
Of ours? Do we deserve the royal throne ? ”’

That cavalier replied: °* O thou that art
The memory of heroes in the world !

There was an archimage at Rai who said :—
* The wise and lucky man to whom ’tis given
Once to be king his soul will soar to heaven.’
So aiming at the treasure of the king

Is better than to be long years a slave.”’

Then to the archscribe said Bahram Chubina :—

‘* Old wolf! unclose thy lips.”’
The archscribe kept
His lips still shut awhile and sat amid
A crowd of thoughts, then said: ‘* Whoe’er shall seek
His wish in fitting fashion will attain it,
For time’s stretched hand is long. Know that no
pains
Can shun whatever God will have to be.”’

Then said the chieftain to Hamdan Gashasp :—
“QO thou well versed in fortune’s rise and fall !
Whatever thou shalt utter in our presence
Shall be as wind and, like wind, hurt thee not.
Advise us in this case, this test of good
And evil fortune.”’

Great Hamdan Gashasp
Thus spake: “ Prized by the great! why dost thou
dread
Ills not yet come and question of the crown

* Reading with P. C. has [zid Gashasp.

Google
<pb n="167"/>
HURMUZD 167

Of kingship ? Act and leave the rest. to God.
Why reach out for the date if thou dost fear
The thorn ? A people’s Head hath never rest ;
His mind is fearful and his body weary.”’

The sister of the captain of the host
Writhed at their words and grew o’ercast of soul,
Yet spake she naught in this debate from eve
Till midnight. Then Bahrim Chubina said :—

‘** What thinkest thou of this assembly’s words,
Fair lady 7”

Gurdya made no reply ;
The counsels of the chief displeasured her.
Thereafter she addressed the archscribe thus :—
**O man maleficent like some old wolf !
So thou conceivest that the crown and throne,
Host and addition and the might of fortune
Were in the world no objects of desire
To anv famous chiefs of generous bent
Though kingship easier is than servitude !
Such sentiments as thine demand our tears.
Take we the precedents of former Shahs,
And hear the sayings of those greater ones.”

The archscribe made response: ‘“ If rede of mine
Obtain not with thee speak and do whatever
Thou art advised and follow thv heart’s lead.”

Then likewise to self-willed Bahram Chubina
His sister spake and said: ‘‘ They are not good,
Thy knowledge and thy counsel, and thy steps
Are tending toward deccit. Full many a time
Hath the Shah’s throne been void and yet no chief
Cast any look upon it. It was theirs
To guard the world by valour, not to have
An eve upon the throne. They did not aim
Thereat but girt their loins to serve. They sought
Their sovereigns’ weal and rendered hearty service.
They were no strangers to the throne and crown,

Google
<pb n="168"/>
C. 1855

168 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

But worthy of their greatness by descent.

I speak first of the case of Shah Katus,?

Who would have searched the mysteries of God,

Have summed the stars and trod heaven’s circling
dome,

But fell despised and wretched at Sarf

Through his perverseness and ill bent, and vet

Gudarz and Rustam, who was paladin,

Did not take dudgeon, and thereafter when

Kaus went to Hamavaran,? and folk

Bound him in heavy fetters, none essayed

The throne but manifested warm regret.

So when the Iranians said to Rustam: ‘ Thou

Art worthy of the throne,’’ he cried against

The speaker: °* Be thy mate the narrow charnel !

Shall I be on the throne of gold, the Shah

Bound ? Perish kingship rather! Perish crown !’

He chose out of fran twelve thousand men, *

World-taking cavaliers on barded steeds,

And freed Katis and Giv, Guidarz and Tus,

From that captivity. Then when Pirtiz

Was slain and for the Iranians all was lost,®

While Khushnawaz emboldened by affairs

Was seated on the alluring throne in peace,

Came Sufarai, the scion of Karan,

In order to restore the throne of power.

When his success was manifest the nobles

Went from fran to hail him as their Shah,

And make a subject monarch of the earth.

He told them: ‘’Tis unseemly. Majesty

And crown are for the Shah. Although Kubad

Is little he will grow; we may not put

The wolf within the lion’s wood. To make

* See Vol. ii. p. 102 seq.
* Id. p. 82 sea. * Cf. Id. p. 143.
4 Cf. p. toy and note. ‘ See Vol. vii, p. 167 seq.

Google
<pb n="169"/>
HURMUZD 169

A Shah without blood royal is to give

His kindred to the winds.” Now when Kubad
Reached manhood he perceived that Sufarai
Deserved the crown and, led by miscreants’ words,
Slew him who was the backbone of the state.

The folk thereafter put Kubad in fetters,

That horseman bold, that hero of the race

Of kings, and gave him to Zarmihr, the low-born,
That he might take revenge for his own sire.
Zarmihr saw none else worthy of the crown

And throne of kingship, so he freed Kubad

In order that he might assert his claim

Without delay. No subject dared aspire

Though many were entitled by their birth.

When from the Turks one hight * King Sawa’ came
To seek the seal and crown the glorious Maker
Ordained that he should perish in fran.

Since by God’s Grace and by thy hand so great
An action was by thine own thumbstall wrought
Thou wouldest have the empire! Know that thou
Wilt lose thy life. Yalan-sina curvetteth,
Exclaiming: ‘I will set up a new king—

Bahram Chubina, offspring of Gashasp—

And make my name remembered.’ Nutshirwan,
The understanding Shah, found in old age

His lost vouth in Hurmuzd whom all the magnates
Of this our realm support. Support, say I?

Are all his bondslaves and his underlings.

He hath three hundred thousand cavaliers,

All paladins, all famed, and all his slaves,
Obedient to his will, yet chose he thee

By virtue of his high prerogative,

Ennobled all thine ancestors and granted

Revenge upon their foes. Wilt thou repay

His good with ill 2? Know ’twill recoil on thee.
Design not evil, brother! It will bring

Google

C. 1856
<pb n="170"/>
170 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Ill on thine own head. Make not greed the lord
O’er wisdom else the sages will not call thee
A man of piety. Although a woman,
Far younger than my brother, yet I give
A man’s advice. Oh! fling not to the wind
Thy fathers’ deeds and mayst thou not recall
My words to mind.”

The assembly marvelled at her,
The chieftain bit his lips as well aware
That what she said was just and that she sought
The path of right. Yalan-sina replied :—
‘**O noble lady! in this company
Forbear to treat of Shahs because Hurmuzd
Will soon pass and the paladin enjoy
The throne of majesty. Now since the Shah
Is what he is in prowess count thy brother
Already as the monarch of fran,
And if Hurmuzd affect! the roval crown
Why sendeth he a distaff as a oift ?
The paladin is such a lhion-man
That at the terror of his sword earth quaketh,
And had his sword remained undrawn Hurmuzd,
fran and Sham had perished, and to send him
The present of a distaff and of cotton !
Fie on a king so faithless! Talk no more
About Turk-born Hurmuzd. May all that race
No longer be! To count from Kai Kubad
This stock hath had the crown and throne

gold
A thousand years. Now it is at an end,
So name them not or give Khusrau Parwiz
A thought ; his mention is not worth a mite,
And those that are the princes at his court
Will be thy brother's subjects who will place
At his word their lord’s feet in heavy bonds.”
' Reading with P.

Google

of
<pb n="171"/>
HURMUZD 171

‘ The Black Div spreadeth out,” said Gurdya
A net upon thy path. Destroy us! not,
Both soul and body. I perceive in thee
But wind and vapouring. Our sire was march-
lord
At Rai and thou wouldst have us seek the throne.
Now thine incitement of Bahram Chibina,
And putting into tumult all our kindred,
Will give our race’s travail to the wind,
And through thy words, thou base-born underling !
Yea! lead him on and fill our quiet times
With turbulence ! ”
She spake and then withdrew
In tears with heart grown alien from her brother,
While all those present said: ‘ This saintly lady,
Our eloquent, clear-minded counsellor,
Hath spoken, thou wouldst. say, just like a book,
And is in wisdom greater than Jamasp.”
Howbeit the thing displeased Bahram Chubina,
Who was in dudgeon at his sister’s words,
And through long musing his distempered heart
Showed him the throne of kingship in his dreanis.
He said: “ By toil alone aspirants win
This fleeting world.”
He bade to Spread the board,
And call for wine and harp and minstrelsy,
He told the minstrels: « Let your song to-day
Be of heroic deeds. | will not hear
Aught but the story of the Seven Stages ;
So while we revel sing the part wherein
Asfandiyar went to the Brazen Hold,
And of the game he played in that campaign.’’2
They drank much wine to him and cried: “ May
Rai
Be prosperous since such a chief as thou

1 Id, * See Vol. v. p. 143.

Google

C. 1857
<pb n="172"/>
C. 1858

172 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Ariseth thence, and may God fashion more
Like thee.”

At night they went their several ways ;
The heads of all those topers were a-daze.

§ 26

Buhradm Chiébina’s Letter tothe Khan and how he coined
Money with the Name of Khusrau Parwiz and
sent it to Hurmuzd

Whenas the rising sun shot forth its beams,

And darksome night turned sicklv at the glow,

The chief Bahram Chubina, that bold Wolf,

Bade the archscribe attend. They wrote the Khan

A letter that was worthy of the Artang,?

Perfumed?, illuminate and illustrate :—

** For grief, while asking pardon for mine acts,

My heart is full of sighing and remorse.

Henceforth I will not hurt thy country, land,

Or marches through regard for thee; and I,

If I become the monarch of the world,

Will be to thee as ’twere a vounger brother.

Wash vengeance from thy heart and thou shalt know

No difference between fran and Chin.

Take not to heart the past for God forgiveth

His slave. A thousand blessings on thy helm,

Upon thy sword and thy world-conquering hand.”’
He spake much to the same effect. The envoy

Was in amaze at him, then trod earth’s face,

And bore the message to the Khan of Chin

By whom a gracious answer was returned :—

‘““I for my part term thee magnanimous.”

' See Vol. ii. p. 19 and nole. * Reading with P.

Google
<pb n="173"/>
HURMUZD 173

He sent Bahram Chubina gifts that cheered
The heart.
This matter done, Bahram Chubina
Formed other plans, unlocked his hoarded treasures,
Gave his troops drachms, steeds, slaves, and privily
Aimed at the seat of sovereignty. He chose
Among the host a paladin, one fit
To be the prince of Khurasan, bestowed
That land on him with Nishaptr and Balkh,
Marv and Harat, and troops withal, then went,
From Balkh to Rai, full of solicitude,
Upon the glorious Khurdad of Da;
Took thought of great and small, then bade his men
Set up a mint and issue coins that bore
The superscription of Khusrau Parwiz.
He gave to merchants shrewd and plausible
Of speech, and fitted for the ticklish task,
Sacks of these new-coined drachms and said: ‘ Buy
up

Whatever ye can get in Taisafuin
Of costly Rum brocade with silken figures
Upon a ground of gold.”’

He meant to bring
That coinage to the notice of the king.

§ 27

How Bahrdm Chibina wrote to Hurmuzd and how
Khusrau Parwiz fled from his Father

Bahram Chubina chose a prudent envoy,
Strong as the blest Surush.1 He wrote withal
A blustering letter and discoursed at large

1 The previous section ends here in the original.

Google
<pb n="174"/>
C. 1859

174 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

About Parmida and king Saéwa’s host,

How he and his own troops had fought, the gift

That had been given to him by the Shah—

That woman’s coif and that black distaff-case—

Then said thus: “Thou wilt never more behold
me

E’en in a dream so draw thy fish-hook up.}!

While thine illustrious, high-fortuned son,

Khusrau Parwiz, is seated on the throne

At his command will I make mountains plains,

And deserts like Jihtn with foemen’s blood.

Young though he be still he is fit to rule,

And faithful, not a faithless one like thee.

I have accepted him as king of kings,

And will henceforth be man to none beside.”

His wish was that the king should put to death
The son though innocent? because he feared
Khusrau Parwiz, a young and charming prince.
The fortune-favoured envoy reached Baghdad
With men of name from Rai. Hurmuzd grew pale
As fenugreek when he received the letter.

Anon accounts of that new coinage reached him,
Which added grief to grief. He writhed, suspected
His son, and spake thus to Ayin Gashasp :—

‘* Khusrau Parwiz hath grown so bold that le

Fain would revolt ; moreover he hath struck

A brand-new coinage! Could he hold me cheaper ? ”’

Ayin Gashasp replied: ‘‘ Be course and charger
Ne’er seen without thee. Though Khusrau Parwiz
Is thine own son he should be bound for this.”

Hurmuzd made answer: “ Presently will I
Remove this upstart.”

That ambitious lord

' Jamais, méme en réve, tu ne me verras porter sous le bras
du linge sortant de l’eau.’’ Mohl.
* Couplet omitted. * Five couplets omitted.

Google
<pb n="175"/>
HURMUZD 175

Thus answered him: ‘“‘ May none prevail without
thee.”’

They called one privily by night and set him
Before the Shah who said: ‘‘ Perform my bidding,
And rid earth’s surface of Khusrau Parwiz.”’

He said: “I will, and charm love from my

heart,
So let the Shah assign me from his store
Bane, and some dark night when Khusrau Parwiz
Is drunken I will drug his wine. This way
Is better than to shed his blood.”’
The son,
Unwitting that his ruin was proposed,}
Sat in his palace gloriously, intent
On charming Idols and on pleasant wine,
And ignorant of all. A chamberlain
Heard of the plot, banned appetite and sleep,
Sped to Khusrau Parwiz and made all clear.
He, hearing that the monarch of the world
Was plotting secretly to slay him, fared
From Taisafin by night, and thou hadst said :—
‘** He vanished from the world.’ He did not give
His priceless head away but reached apace
Azar Abadagan. When tidings came
To all the chiefs—the marchlords of that province :—
‘““ Khusrau Parwiz, aggrieved against the king,
Hath fled with some few cavaliers,” those mag-
nates
Sought for the traces of that well loved prince ;?
All went, both troops and chiefs, to make him

Shah.
They said: ‘‘O prince! crown, throne, and helm
befit thee,

And from fran and desert of the spearmen
As many of the swordsmen and brave leaders,

» Reading with P. * Three couplets omitted.

Google

C. 1860
<pb n="176"/>
176 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

As thou mayst wish, will come to thee. Thv
Grace
Will lead the army on. Fear no disaster,
But live great, glad, and well beloved.!- Although
Three hundred thousand horsemen of fran
Shall mount the saddle to discomfit thee
We all will give our bodies to be slain
For thy sake and will honour those that fall.”
He said: “I fear the Shah and folk, ve chiefs !
Unless ye come before Azargashasp,
And take great oaths to assure me that henceforth
Ye will be loyal to me; then will I
Abide here in all confidence and fear
Not Ahriman.”’
The warriors, when they heard
His words, all set forth for Azargashasp.
They took the oath thet he desired, protesting :—
** We hold thy love as precious as our eyes.”
Assured about the chiefs he secretly
Sent agents everywhere to learn what szid
His father of his flight and purposed next.
The Shah, on hearing that Khusrau Parwiz
Had fled, sent hastily to put Bandwi
And Gustaham in bondage as suspects ;
Both were the uncles of Khusrau Parwiz
Upon the mother’s side and heroes bold.
All others of his kin beside these two
They also haled to ward without to-do.

1 Two couplets omitted.

Google
<pb n="177"/>
HURMUZD 177

§ 28

How Hurmuzd sent Ayin Gashasp with an Army to
fight Bahram Chibina and how he was slain by his
Comrade

Then to Ayin Gashasp thus spake the Shah :—
“I lack advice and sorrow is my mate.
Now that my son hath gone how shall we treat
Bahram Chiubina, that slight, self-willed slave ? ”
Ayin Gashasp sought an expedient
To make his counsel gracious and replied :—
‘“* Exalted Shah! Bahram Chubina oft
Hath spoken of me and of all things he
Desireth most my blood for I was first
To vex him privily, and to dispatch me
In fetters to him may prove serviceable.”’
The Shah made answer: “ This is not my work,
But miscreant Ahriman’s. I will dispatch
A host; be thou its leader and prevail ;
But send him first one of our counsellors
To learn his purpose. Fortune, if he seeketh
Power, crown, and throne, will turn from him at last,
While if he shall remain a loyal liege
"Twill be the better for him in the end.
Him will I give a portion of the world,
And set upon his head the heroes’ crown.
The world hath scarcely such a warrior,
But, though like Rustam, he is still my thrall.
Inform me of his doings every whit ;
Proceed with diligence ; cut short the way.”
The order given by the prudent Shah
Ayin Gashasp obeyed.
There was a captive,
And fellow-citizen of his, within

VOL. VIII. M

Google

C. 1861
<pb n="178"/>
178 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

The royal prison, eager for release.
On hearing that Ayin Gashasp, the horseman,
Was going to the war he sent to say :—
*O battle-loving warrior! I am
Thy fellow-citizen and now in prison.
Thou art acquainted with my quality.
I, if thou wilt but beg me from the king,
Will fare with thee on this campaign and risk
My life before thee when I am released
From this strait prison-house.”’
Ayin Gashasp
Thereat sent to the monarch of the world
A man in haste to say: “ There is in bonds
A fellow-citizen of mine in fear
And peril who will go with me.if now
The Shah will grant him pardon for my sake.”
C. 1862 The Shah replied : ‘‘ How should this useless wretch
Fight in the front of thee ? Thou pleadest for
A murderer, a scamp, and thief! Dost thou
Look for reward ? Still I have now no choice
Though ’twere the greatest of calamities.”
He gave Ayin Gashasp that man compact
Of ill, that villain, thief, and murderer,
And then Ayin Gashasp led forth the host,
And marched like wind as far as Hamadan,
Where he encamped and asked: “Is any one
Skilled in astrology or presages
Within this noble city ? ”’
All replied :—
Our readers of the stars shall come before thee,
And earn thy praise.”
An old, officious townsman
Came bustling up and said: “ There is a dame
Both old and rich here, and thou mightest say :--
‘She is the stars’ eye.’ What she saith is so;
Her prophecies will surely come to pass.’’

Google
<pb n="179"/>
HURMUZD 179

Ayin Gashasp, on hearing this, dispatched
One with a horse for her and when she came
He asked her how the Shah fared and of him
Who led the host, then added: “ Bring thy lips
Close to mine ear and tell me if mv soul
Will quit my swarthy body in its bed,

Or wounded by the weapon of a foe ?”’

While thus he spake of secrets to the crone
With voice so low that none could overhear them
The man for whom he had obtained release,

And taken as companion on the journey,
Approached and, as he passed by that sage dame,
Looked at the general and went his way.
The ancient dame inquired: ‘ What man is that ?
A blow of his will make one weep for thee.
Thy dear life lieth in his hand, and may
He perish, skin and marrow !”’

At her words
Ayin Gashasp recalled a former presage,
Which he had heard from readers of the stars
But had forgotten. Thus it ran: ‘‘ Thy fate
Shall be in thy companion’s hand—a man
Both mean and poor—who will go far with thee,
And in return for friendship shed thy blood.”

He gave her presents and dismissed her quickly,
But could not sleep or eat for care. He wrote
A letter to the Shah: “ The man whom I
Send back should not have been released for he
Is worse than dragon’s spawn, and so the Shah
Informed his slave who lacked the imperial Grace.
When this man cometh bid the ill-disposed?
Behead him instantly.”

He wrote and sct

' The divine insight pertaining to lawful kingship.
* The executioner, according to Mohl, but execution sometimes
was embittered by being entrusted to the hands of a private enemy.

Google

C. 1863
<pb n="180"/>
180 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

His seal thereon. When it was dry he called
His fellow-citizen, much lauded him,
Bestowing gifts and many hearty blessings,
Then said: ‘“‘ Convey this letter unperceived
And quickly to the monarch of the world.
Bring his reply to me with all dispatch,
And see that thou remain not with the king.”
The young man took the letter from the chief ;
His mind was all surmises at that mission,
And thus he said: “ I have endured enough
Of prison, heavy bonds, and want of food ;
But God delivered me from my distress,
From grief, affliction, and mine evil fortune ;
Yet now that I return to Taisafin
My blood and marrow seethe.”’
He journeyed sadly
Awhile, then broke the letter open, read it,
And marvelled at the process of the world.
He said: “ My neighbour begged my life and urged :—
* The act is worthy of the prince,’ so how
Should he be now insistent for my blood
Unless some dream hath moved him to this ill ?
But now to bloodshed he shall see the way,
And rest from travail and endeavouring !”
He turned back musing, went as swift as wind,
And on arrival found the chief alone.
Ayin Gashasp was seated in his tent,
Without attendant, scimitar, and steed
Absorbed in thinking on the king and all
That fortune might inflict upon himself.
Now when his neighbour came within his tent
Avin Gashasp knew that he proposed bloodshed.
The murderer drew his scimitar; the chief
Implored him much and said: ‘* Deluded one!
Did not I beg thy lost life from the Shah ? ”
The other answered : ‘‘ Granted. What have I

Google
<pb n="181"/>
HURMUZD 181

Done that thou Shouldst deal jl] with me ? ”
He smote

His bloody head unnoticed from the tent.
Let him that seeketh honour never be

He marched against thee, knowing not thy purpose.”
Bahrdm Chibina asked : “Who is it? Who
Will mourn this head 7”
He said: “ Ayin Gashasp,
The cavalier, who left the court for war.”
Bahram Chubina said: “ The man was good,
And he had come from court to reconcile
The Shah and us, and thou hast ta’en his head
While sleeping! Now will I requite thee so
That folk shall sore bewail thee.”
He bade set
A gallows at the door in sight of all,
And gibbeted the wretch alive, thus rousing
The hearts of evil-doers. Many horsemen
Brought by Ayin Gashasp from court sought out
Bahram Chubina when their chief had perished,
While many others sought Khusrau Parwiz,
And some the Shéh. A flock will stray just so
Un-herded on a day of wind and snow.

* Or with Mohl: “11 sentit que le sang versé le rendait infame.”’

Google

C. 1864
<pb n="182"/>
C. 1865

182 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

§ 29

How Hurmuzd grieved, refused Audience to the [rdnians,
and was blinded by Bandwi and Gustaham

When tidings reached the king of that famed hero,
Ayin Gashasp, he shut the gate of audience
For grief; none saw him too with wine in hand ;
He could not rest or eat or sleep; his eyes
Were full of tears. At court the talk ran much
Upon the Shah and his secluded state.
One said: “‘ Bahrim Chubina seeketh fight,
Desirous of the throne of majesty.”
Another said: “ Aggrieved against the Shah
Khusrau Parwiz is marching on [ran.”’
Confounded at the case the warriors
Each held a different view, and as the bruit
Arose from Taisafin the monarchy
Lost credit while its servants’ heads were full
Of grief and wrath, preferring curse to blessing.
Few troops remained about the gate; the world
Grew strait to the Shah’s heart.
Then tidings reached
Bandwi and Gustaham: ‘“ The Grace of kingship
Is darkened.”’
All the captives loosed their bonds,
And sent forth one to ascertain and learn
What warriors’ kept the portal of the Shah,
And having learned rebelled, threw off restraint,
And broke from ward; shouts rose that shook the
plain ;
The garrison were left remcdiless.
Appeared Bandwi and Gustaham in mail
With troops in arms. The cavaliers forthwith,

Google
<pb n="183"/>
HURMUZD 183

All unabashed, rode hot-foot to the court,!
And gallant Gustaham harangucd the troops :—
** This is no trivial case, for if ye join

With us ye must ban reverence for the Shah.
If ye will all gird up your loins in vengeance
For those franian chiefs, beeause Hurmuzd
Hath turned upon the innocent, henceforth
Hail him not, Shah; we will requite his deed,
And turn for him the waters of fran

To colocynth. We will direct your course,
And set a new Shah on his throne. If ye
Show weakness we will leave Iran to you :

A corner of the world will do for us,

And thither with our comrades will we go.”

The whole throng at the words of Gustaham
Began to curse the Shah’s peace and exclaimed :—
‘** Down with a king that sheddeth his son’s blood ! ”’

The troops thus heartened fired the palace-gate,
Made entry of the imperial hall, and reached
The presence of the Shah, that man of Grace.
When they had ta’en his crown and flung him head-

long
Down from his throne they set upon his eyes
The searing irons, and the radiant Lamps
Were darkened. Then they suffered him to live,
And gave his treasure shamefully to spoil.

Such are the doings of the exalted sky !

Affect not thou this Wayside Hostelry,
Wherefrom we have our whiles of wealth and woe,
And in the end must quit them both and go.

The hundredth and the hundred thousandth year
As soon as they are numbered disappear.

The man by whom good fortune would be won
Must speak no evil and must list to nonce.”

1 Couplet omitted.
* In C. and P. the reign ends here.

Google
<pb n="184"/>
C. 1866

184 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI!-

§ 80
How Khusrau Parwiz heard of the Blinding of Hurmuzd

Then Gustaham sent to Azargashasp
One with two roadsters to Khusrau Parwiz
In haste by night with tidings from fran.
The messenger approached the youthful Shah
(The moon was one night old) and told what he
Had heard of or had seen in that revolt.
The young prince paled like flower of fenugreek,
And cried: “ Whoever quitteth wisdom’s ways,
Obeying impulse through his lack of knowledge,
And fearless of the process of high heaven,
His life will profit not. If I found pleasure
In this thy tale of ill my food and sleep
Would turn to fire, but though, what time my father
Set hand to blood, I could no longer dwell
Within fran yet I am still his slave,
And hearken to his words.”’

All seared at heart
He marched his host as swift as fire for fear
Lest that world-winner, great Bahram Chubina,
Should get the start of him, and so he led
His men from Barda’ and from Ardabil,
Troop after troop, while from Armenia
A power sped with the Shah’s son swift as wind.
As soon as tidings of him reached Baghdad :—
“The claimant of the throne of might hath come,”’
The folk were all contented, and thereby
The atheling accomplished his desire.
The great men of the city—those that shared
The general joy—went out to welcome him,
Then going to the dwelling of the Shah
Discoursed at large, and he approved their words.

Google
<pb n="185"/>
HURMUZD 185

They set an ivory throne upon the dais

With golden torque and with a sumptuous crown
That many a Shah had worn: it had beheld

No lack upon the state. Khusrau Parwiz

Made entry of the city mournfully,

And visited his father with a sigh.!

* There is no break here in the original.

Google
<pb n="186"/>
XLII
KHUSRAU PARWIZ
HE REIGNED THIRTY-EIGHT YEARS

ARGUMENT

The deposition of Hurmuzd leaves Khusrau Parwiz and
Bahram Chub{na rivals for the throne. After abortive nego-
tiations Khusrau Parwiz is compelled to flee to Rim and
Hurmuzd is put to death. On the way to Rum Khusrau
Parwiz is saved from capture by the devotion of his maternal
uncle Bandwi. Bahram Chubina assumes the crown and
frustrates a plot against himself. Khusrau Parwiz is well
received in Rum, is given Casar’s daughter in marriage, and
returns to fran with a Raman army. He is joined by Bandwi
and others. After a severe struggle Bahram Chubina is
forced to take refuge with the Khan of Chin in whose service
he greatly distinguishes himself but as he is preparing to in-
vade Iran his death is compassed by Kharrad, son of Barzin,
at the instigation of Khusrau Parwiz. The Khan avenges
Bahram Chubina whose sister, Gurdya, he asks in marriage.
Gurdva escapes with her brother's partisans to fran. Khusrau
Parwiz to avenge his father puts to death Bandwi whose
brother Gustaham rebels and marries Gurdva. She murders
her husband at the instigation of Khusrau Parwiz who marries
her himself and accords: pardon to her adherents. He treats
the city of Rai harshly but relents at her request. He organizes
the realm. Maryam, Cesar’s daughter, gives birth to Shirwi
(Kubdd) on which occasion Cusar asks for the return of the
True Cross but is refused. The poet then tells of the case of
the fair Shirin, who murders Marvam, and that of Barbad,
the minstrel, and of the greatness of Khusrau Parwiz. Shirwi
is imprisoned, but the troops at length revolt and release him.
Khusrau Parwiz is dethroned and put in ward.

186

Google
<pb n="187"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 187

NOTE

Khusrau Parwiz (Chosroes II, A.D. 590-628) was contem-
porary with three Eastern Roman Emperors—Maurice (A.D.
582-602), Phocas (A.D. 602-610), and Heraclius (A.D. 610-
642). The word “ Parwiz’’ seems to be a variant of the
Persian word “ Piruz”’ which means “ victorious.” Certainly
Khusrau Parwiz did more to justify such a title than any
Shéh since the days of Darius Hystaspis. Egypt and the
whole of the Roman possessions in Asia fell into his hands,
and Persian troops were encamped wthin a mile of Constanti-
nople. The genius of Heraclius, however, at length turned the
tide. On all these great events the Shahndma is silent and
the bulk of the material of the reign is made up from the
Romance of Bahram Chubina! which leaves his sister, Gurdya,
firmly established in the favour of Khusrau Parwiz though
with Shirin in the neighbourhood it seems doubtful whether
she would be allowed to retain her position long.2. The reign
is the last great one of the poem and towards the end of it

‘‘ bad begins, and worse remains behind.”

§ 4. Tabari also states that the meeting between Khusrau
Parwiz and Bahram Chubina took place on the Nahrawdan.3

§5. The proverb is in the Persian Tabari but is spoken by
Khusrau Parwiz when about to combat with three Turks.*
See below.

§§ 6-7. In the Persian Tabari the three Turks are encoun-
tered by Khusrau Parwiz after his return from Rim,' not as
here and in Tabari.®

§ 8. * Thou shalt not kill, but need’st not strive

Officiously to keep alive.”
probably about represents the share of responsibility that
Khusrau Parwiz had in his father’s murder. Bandwi and
Gustaham were his maternal uncles.

§9. According to the Persian Tabari Bahram, the son of
Siyadwush, had married Bahram Chubina’s niece.’

Firdaus{’s description of Khusrau Parwiz’ place of refuge is
somewhat grandiloquent. It appears to have been a hermi-
tage® or monastery.® ,

§§ 12. For the wife of Bahram, son of Siyawush, see above.

1 See p. 72. * Cf. pp. 364, 389. * NT, pp. 274, 278.
‘ZT, ii. 292. ’ Id. p. 291. * NT, pp. 274, 280.
7 ZT, ui. 283. * Id. 280. ° NT, p. 281.

Google
<pb n="188"/>
188 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Mausil, prince of Mush, was a member of the Mamigonian
family, celebrated in Armenian history.!

§ 13. Khusrau Parwiz, on quitting Ctesiphon in his flight,
crossed the Euphrates and went to Ambar, thence followed the
course of the stream and recrossing it reached the Roman
frontier-station of Circesium. Subsequently at the invitation of
the Emperor Maurice he took up his residence at Hierapolis.*

According to the Persian Tabari the Arab was Ijas, son of
Kabisa. He was one of the chiefs of the Bani Tayy tribe®
famous for its hospitality. He was made governor of Hira by
Khusrau Parwiz after the execution of Nu’man, the last prince
of the dvnasty, and commanded the Persians at the battle
of Dhu Kar.4 The Persian Tabari omits the meeting with the
merchant.

Karsan looks like a Persian form of Circesium but is a
shortened form of Karistan, a busy place. The miracle is not
in the Persian Tabari.

Warigh, as appears from the account in the Persian Tabarif,®
was Rakka (Nicephorium, Callinicus) now in ruins. Some
miles to the south-west of it lay thé city of Reseph or Rasafa,
also now in ruins, in which was the shrine of the celebrated
Saint Sergius who with his consort Saint Bacchus suffered
martytdom under Maximian. The town was in consequence
known as Sergiopolis. Either from a genuine but temporary
impulse or from policy Khusrau Parwiz during his exile in
Rum much affected Christianity, adopted Sergius as his patron
Saint and after recovering his throne still continued to send
gifts to, and ask favours of, that shrine. Tabari makes Sergiug
the leader of the Roman army that effected the restoration of
Khusrau Parwiz.6 In the Shéhnama the hermit—Sergius.

§17. The terms on which the Emperor Maurice agreed
to help Khusrau Parwiz included the cession of Dard, Martyro-
polis, and perhaps Nisibis.7 Western authorities are silent
about the marriage of the Emperor’s daughter Maryam to
Khusrau Parwiz, but Néldeke points out that Shfrwfs pre-
eminence at the Persian court is best explained by the assump-

1 Td. 285, RSM, 319. * NT, p. 282 note, RSM, p. 480 and note.

: ZT, ll. 286. ‘NT, p. 333 sey. ZT, ii. pp. 286, 318 seq.

* ZT, ii. 258, For Dhu Kar see p. 190.

* Sce NT, p. 284 and note, ZT, ii. 288, GDF, v, 375 and note, RSM,
Pp. 497 and aotle.

7 NT, p. 285 nole, RSM, p. 482 and note, GDF, v. 375 and note.

Google
<pb n="189"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 189

tion that his mother was @ princess. Shirin, who naturally
was antagonistic to him in the interests of her own son, Mar-
dénshéh, was unable to prevail against him.

and so described in the Persian Tabari,? of Maurice and had
already been crowned by the Emperor. He may have accom-

§23. The mission of Déré Pangh is not in the Persian
Tabarf.

§§ 24-26. Historically the events of the campaign seem to
have been briefly as follows ‘—Khusrau Parwiz with his Roman
allies marched to the lesser Zab in order to effect a junction

his two uncles and Mausil. Bahram Chibina vainly tried
to prevent this. He then offered battle with his back to the

disaster. This incident appears as the intervention of Surish
in the Shéhn4ma.5 In the meantime a detachment of the

§27. The Persian Tabarf lays the scene with the car-
line in the neighbourhood of Hamadén. Thence Bahrém
Chubina proceeds to Rai and Démaghén. He then defeats a
mountain-chief named Kéran and takes him prisoner but
releases him.®

oo

1 NT, p. 283 note, RSM, P. 504 nofe. * GDF, y. 373 and note, 391.
* ZT, ii. 291. ) ‘ NT, p. 284 note.
* See p. 299, * ZT, i. p. 296 seq.

Google
<pb n="190"/>
Igo THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

§ 30. According to Sdsdnian usage Khusrau Parwiz in-
augurates his reign by visiting the Fire-temple at Shiz.!

§31. The death of Firdausi’s son took place apparently
about A.D. 1004.

§ 32. In the Persian Tabari the name of the chief that
domineered over the Khan was Paighi—the word used for the
races of the north in Dakikis portion of the Shahnaéma.? He
was the Khan's brother and claimed to have a better title
to the throne.’

§ 34. In the Persian Tabari it is a bear that carries off
’ the Khan’s daughter and Bahram Chubina rescues her.4

§37. In the Persian Tabari the queen is concerned directly
in the murder of Bahram Chubina. She is heavily bribed and
provides the assassin.® So too in Tabari.®

§ 39. The crafty Kharrad, son of Barzin, as Firdausi calls
him, but whose real naine was Hurmuzd Garabzin or Galab-
zin, may be identical with the chief who commanded one of the
Persian wings at the battle of Dh Kar’? and was killed,® but
according to the Shahnama he was alive at the accession of
Kubdad (Shirwi).

The battle of Dhu Kar, though the forces engaged in it do
not appear to have been large, was a very memorable affair.
The events that led up to it are given at length in Tabari. It
will be sufficient to say here that a long series of intrigues re-
sulted in the execution of Nu’man bin Munzir by order of
Khusrau Parwiz. This ended the dynasty of the princes of
Hira, and Ijas bin Kabisa® was appointed the Persian governor
by the Shah who ordered him to collect and dispatch to the
Persian court all Nu’mdan’s effects. The Arab chief, Hani
bin Mas’ud, who had been entrusted with them refused to give
them up. Khusrau Parwiz instructed Ij4s to enforce com-
pliance, and the battle of Dhu Kar, in which the Persians were
overthrown, followed. Where Dhi Kar was is not clear but
it was not far from the Euphrates and Kufa, and had an all
the year round water-supply which made it a great resort of
the Arab tribes in the summer at which season the battle was
fought. The Arabs celebrated their victory with songs of
triumph, and its results and those of the Persian policy that

1 Vol. i. p. 60. * Vol. v. p. 21 and note. * ZT, i. 302.

‘Td. § Id. 303. * NT, p. 289.

7 Sce below. * NT, pp. 289 and note, 335 nole, 338, 341, 342.
* Cf. p. 188,

Google
<pb n="191"/>
KHUUSRAU PARWIZ IQ!

led up to it were very important. The destruction of the
dynasty of the princes of Hira, which had formed a buffer-
state between the Persians and the Arabs, was a political
blunder. The defeat was a display of weakness on the part
of the Persians in a region at no great distance from their own
capital. It gave the Arabs independence, encouraged them
to make raids into Persian territory, and was a glorious and
stimulating memory with which tradition soon associated
Muhammad himself when the time came for the great Arab
invasion of fran. For these reasons the battle called for some
notice here although there is no mention of it in the Shahnama.
It was fought some time between A.D. 604-610.1

§§ 40-42. According to Tabari the Khan wished to marry
Gurdya to his brother who pursues and is killed by her.?

$$ 44-47. On these see NT, p. 478 seq. The story of the
revolt of Gustaham seems only to be known from various
versions of the Romance of Bahram Chubina. Bandwi ap-
pears to have been killed early in the reign about the year
A.D. 591. Gustaham rebelled shortly afterwards and held
out till about A.D. 595.

§ 52. Shirwi seems to have been Khusrau Parwiz’ eldest
son but who his real mother was is unknown.? His troubles
with his father sprang from Shirin’s ambition on behalf of her
own son, Mardanshah.*

§§ 53-54. According to the Shahnima the Cross had been
long indeed in the possession of the Persians. Here the carrv-
ing off is attributed to Ardshir not Darab.® Historically
they took 1t when they captured Jerusalem in A.D. 614.6 It
was given back as one of the terms of peace between Heraclius
and Kubdad (Shirwi) in A.D. 628.

The statement that Jesus laughed upon the Cross is a corol-
lary from the notion, common among the Gnostics, that he was
not really crucified but some one in his stead. The more accur-
ate form of the statement would be that quoted in Photius
from a work called “ The Journeys (or Circuits) of the Apostles ”’
('Amoorédwr Mepioda) viz. that Christ was not crucified but
another in his place, and that therefore he laughed at the
ecruci fiers (Tov Xpiorov pn otavpwOyvat ‘add’ Erepow ‘avr’ “avrov, Kai
KarayeAgy bia TovTo Tay oravpouvTrwy),* Muhammad in the Kuradn

1 See for the above generally NT, p. 310 seq. and notes, ZT, il. 309 seq.
MNT, p.2da. > Cf. p. 188. “NT, p. 357, note.
* Vol. ve p. 306, and nole. * NT, p. 2yt note. 7 BP, cod. 114.

Google
<pb n="192"/>
192 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

adopted this view which of course became the belief of his
followers :—‘‘ They slew him not and they crucified him not,
but they had only his likeness.’”?

§56. Shirin has been described by different authorities
as of Roman, Greek, Armenian, and Persian descent. She
has been identified also with Maryam, the problematical wife
of Khusrau Parwiz—a view that receives no support from
the Shahnama. There is a general agreement that she was a
Christian. According to the Shahndma the association of
Khusrau Parwiz with Shirin began during his father’s lifetime.
This is affirmed also in some accounts quoted by Mir Khand
according to which Shirin was in the service of a Persian noble
at whose house Khusrau Parwiz in his youth occasionally
visited. There he saw Shirin, fell in love with her, and gave
her a ring. The noble got to know of what was going on and
ordered a servant to drown her. She saved herself, however,
with the servant’s connivance and took refuge with a hermit.
After Khusrau Parwiz became Shah she got the ring conveyed
to him, and he carried her off to Mada’in in great state.® If
Shirin really managed to retain her influence over Khusrau
Parwiz for the best part of a lifetime she must have been pos-
sessed of a very exceptional personality. The devotion to
her of her lover, Farhad, is celebrated in Nizdmi’s poem of
‘““Khusrau and Shirin” (A.D. 1180). Farhad, famous for
his architectural and engineering skill, seems to be an histoni-
cal character. To him with some probability may be attri-
buted the responsibility for Khusrau Parwiz’ triumphal arch
at Takht-i-Bustan* near Kirmanshdh and his palace at Mashita
(Mashetta) some twenty-five miles due east of the northern
end of the Dead Sea. The date of the construction of this
palace, of which the exquisitely carved stone facade is now
in the Kaiser Friedrich Museum at Berlin, however, is still
disputed.5 Farhad is not mentioned in the Shaéhnama. In
the Persian Tabari Shirin is stated to have been a Greek, to
have predeceased Khusrau Parwiz, and to have been loved
by Farhad, but it is not said that she was in love with him.®
Firdausi does nut suggest that she was of other than Persian

' RK, p. 551 and mole. Cf. SK, 1. 62 and notes, 116 and notes.
"Cf. p. 15. * KM, Pt. 1. Vol. nu. p. 399.

‘ For an illustration see PCHAP, p. 135.

* A general view of the ruins, as they were, and a detail of the orna-
mentation, are givenin RSM, p. 594 seq. * ZT, il. 304.

Google
<pb n="193"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 193

origin, and she is said to have been a native of Khuzistan.!
Her name is derived from the Persian word for milk “ shir”’
and so comes to mean “ sweet.”

§57. A somewhat similar story is told of the Egyptian
Amasis by Herodotus.?

§ 58. The murder of Maryam by Shirin is on the face of it
@ poetical fiction suggested by the known enmity felt by Shirin
with regard to Shirwi who, as a parricide to be, is here repre-
sented in an unfavourable light. His imprisonment probably
was brought about by Shirin in the interests of her own son
Mardanshabh and nearly had the effect desired.

§60. In the Persian Tabari Sarkash is called Sergius.4

§61. The palace here referred to must be the Takht-i-
Khusrau whose fagade and vast hall on the left bank of the
Tigris some twenty-five miles below Baghdad form the finest
remains of Sdsdnian architecture. The palace, however, seems
to have been built not in the days of Khusrau Parwiz but in
those of his grandfather Nushirwan and, as Firdausi states,
a Ruiman architect may have been employed. Khusrau Par-
wiz from about the time of the outbreak of the Roman war
(A.D. 603), after the murder of the Emperor Maurice by Phocas
till nearly the end of his reign, held his court at Dastagird
not at Ctesiphon.®

§§ 63-65. The reign of Khusrau Parwiz bears a considerable
resemblance to that of Assurbanipal (B.C. 668-626). Their
seats of government were on the same historic stream—Dasta-
gird and Mada’in in the former case, Nineveh .and Chalah
in the latter. Both reigns were long and the last great ones
of their respective dynasties. The wars of both monarchs
covered much the same ground—Syria, Armenia, Asia Minor
and Egypt. In both cases a season of military brilliancy and
territorial expansion was followed by one of cumulative dis-
aster. In both cases the national resources were over-strained
and in both cases the subsequent collapse came with startling
suddenness.

The account given by Firdausi of the causes that led to the
fall of Khusrau Parwiz and of the fall itself may be amplified
from other authorities thus :—In A.D. 626 the Sasanian Em-
pire, though it had suffered shrewd blows in the previous

1 NT, p. 283 note. * RH, Bk. ii, ch. 172. * p.196. § ZT, ii. 305.
* For an illustration of the ruins see RSM, frontispicce.
* See p. 194.

VOL. VIII. N

Google
<pb n="194"/>
194 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

campaigns of Heraclius, was still after nearly a quarter of @
century of warfare far from being worsted. It was not Khusrau
Parwiz but Heraclius that made several vain attempts to
bring about peace. The Persian army under Shahrbaraz
(the Gurdz of Firdausi) still occupied Chalcedon, divided only
by a mile, but an impassable mile, of sea from Constantinople.
The Persians had good cause to deplore their lack of sea-power.
To get over this difficulty they made arrangements for a mixed
horde of Avars, Slavs, and other tribes, who had no straits
to cross, to attack Constantinople. That city was besieged
accordingly but proved impregnable to the resources of the
barbarians. Heraclius, meanwhile, contented himself with
operations 1D Lazica but his brother, Theodore, worsted the
Persians in Asia Minor. In this connexion we have an in-
stance of the way in which Khusrau Parwiz treated his un-
successful generals. The defeat of the Persians on the occasion
in question seems largely to have been due to the effects of a
severe hail-storm. Khusrau Parwiz, however, was very wroth
and when the Persian commander died of despondency shortly
afterwards he had the body embalmed and sent to him to be
maltreated In A.D. 627 Heraclius determined on 4 Winter-
campaign against his enemy’s capital. He defeated the
Persians near Nineveh on December 12th and then marched on
Dastagird, some seventy miles above Ctesiphon, where Khusrau
Parwiz had held his court for the previous twenty years in
consequence, it is said, of a prediction made to him when
besieging Dard in the days of the Emperor Phocas that he
would perish on the next occasion that he entered Ctesiphon.*
Nevertheless he retreated thither, abandoning Dastagird to
its fate, and then crossed the Tigris to Bih-Ardshir (Seleucia),
taking with him Shirin, two sons of his by her, and three
daughter-wives.° His eldest son, Shirwi, and his other sons
were in internment at Akr Babil, a state-prison near Babylon.*
At Bih-Ardshir the Shah armed his personal attendants etc.
and sent them to reinforce the defeated Persian army which had
made no effective stand since the battle of Nineveh. These
combined forces, with two hundred elephants, took up their
position on the river Arba, a short distance from Ctesiphon
and broke down the bridges.®5 On January ith A.D. 628
Heraclius advanced from Dastagird, which he had devastated,

» CTC, Vol.i. p. 485. t Id. pp. 494, 496 ® Id. 496, 499.
«NT, p. 356 and note. ® CTC, p. 4038.

Google
<pb n="195"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 195

and three days later encamped within twelve miles of the Arba.
He sent George, the leader of the Armenian contingent, to
reconnoitre the Persian position and on his report retreated
northwards to the neighbourhood of Lake Urumiah where
he passed the rest of the Winter. Shortly before he had made
another of his appeals to Khusrau Parwiz for an accommoda-
tion: “I follow thee and am instant for peace, for I do not of
mine own will consume Persia with fire but because I am
forced thereto by thee. Now therefore let us throw down
our arms and welcome peace. Let us put out the fire before
allis burned.” The Shah refused the offer to the exasperation
of his people’ with whom he was already very unpopular be-
cause, according to Tabarf, he despised them and treated their
great men without regard, had given the barbarian Farruk-
hanzad, son of Sumai, power over them, and ordered the
execution of the captives, and intended to put to death the
Persian troops defeated by Heraclius.2 He had also, it seems,
sent instructions for the putting to death of the Persian general
Shahrbaraz, but the bearer of the letter was taken by the
Romans. Heraclius informed Shahrbaraz who falsified the
letter by making the order apply to forty other chiefs as well
as to himself and read out the dispatch as altered to the as-
sembled Persian leaders. In their wrath they renounced their
allegiance to Khusrau Parwiz, made terms of peace with
Heraclius, and decided to quit Chalcedon and return home.®
Khusrau Parwiz also had managed to offend his native Christ-
ian subjects. In earlier days he had been disposed favourably
towards them, and we have seen how he placed himself under
the special protection of S. Sergius,* while his wife, Shirin,
was a Christian of the Nestorian persuasion. She was, how-
ever, lured over to the Monophysites and used her influence
against the Nestorians who in consequence were not allowed
to choose a Catholicus. A very highly esteemed Nestorian
named Yazdin was chief tax-collector. After his death Khus-
rau Parwiz seized his property and did not bestow by way
of compensation the vacant post on Yazdin’s son, Shamta,
who also was a Nestorian and afterwards took a prominent
part in the revolt against the Shah. Towards the end of the
reign the Monophysites also had cause for complaint against

1 Td.
* NT, p. 356. The prisoners are said to have numbered 36,000.
* CTC, i. 497. ‘ p. 188.

Google
<pb n="196"/>
196 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDA USt

Khusrau Parwiz. Generally speaking, too, all Christians must
have been horrified at the sack of Jerusalem and the carrying
off of the True Cross.1. There was therefore no lack of dis-
content throughout the army and nation generally. The
retreat of Heraclius, however, at a moment when the state
seemed threatened with imminent peril, might have staved
off matters for a while had it not been for the question of the
succession. It 1s said that Khusrau Parwiz when he fled from
Dastagird to Ctesiphon was suffering from dvsenterv and
wished to secure the crown for his son Mardasas (Mardanshah),
the offspring of Shirin.2 Shirwi, the Shah’s eldest son, who
Was in internment with many of his brothers, was therefore in
a situation of imminent peril. A conspiracy was formed to
make him Shih and rescue the captives in the prisons. Among
the conspirators were two sons of Shahrbardz, Shamta, son of
Yazdin, and Mihr Hurmuzad, the son of a former governor of
Nimriz who had fallen a victim to Khusrau Parwiz’ jealous
suspicions.2 A party of the nobles hastened to ’Akr Babil
and brought Shirwi by night to Bih-Ardshir (Seleucia) where,
at the bridge of boats, which it would be important to seize,
he was met by others of the conspirators. The prisons were
thrown open, and that night Khusrau Parwiz heard the shouts
that hailed Shirwi as “* Kubad Shahanshéh.” When the rebels
approached the palace in the early morning the royal body-
guard fled and Khusrau Parwiz escaped into his garden which
was called ‘ The Garden of the Indians’ but was discovered
shortly and taken prisoner. The date, according to our reckon-
ing, was February 25th, A.D. 628.4

§1
The Prelude

Of heaven’s dome revolving rapidly,
And ever restless in its instancy,

What shall I say ? It giveth one a crown,
Another to the fishes in the sea ;

1 See for the above NT, pp. 357, 383 and notes. * CTC. 1. 499.
* NT, p. 379 and nofe. No6ldeke does not consider the execution of
the governor historical. ‘ Id. p. 3506.

Google
<pb n="197"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 197

To one man naked hands and head and fect,

No where to dwell in and no while to eat,
And to another beaver-skin, brocade,

And silk, with milk and honey for his meat.

‘The end of both, ensnared in bale’s dark net,
Is in the dust, and had the sage ne’er set

Eyes on the world, nor passed through days of strife
As lord or liege, his lot were happier yet.

I treat the matter of Khusrau Parwiz,
And proffer to the reader novelties.

§ 2

How Khusrau Parwiz sat upon the Throne and made
an Oration

Whenas Khusrau Parwiz sat on the throne

Of gold the men of noble birth repaired

To him. They summoned all the chiefs and showered
Gems over that new crown. He thus addressed
The archmages: “ No one save the fortunate

Can win this crown and throne. May mine employ
Be right alone for from injustice cometh

All loss. ‘We purpose well to all. Our head

Is void of evil-doing. This new throne,

And this new fortune bright and opulent,

Are mine from God. Do ye withal incline

Your hearts to obey and covenant with us

To observe three things in all contingencies :

To harm not holy men, not to rebel,

1 There is no break here in the original.

Google

C. 1867
<pb n="198"/>
C. 1868

198 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST

And to abstain from others’ goods forwhy

The pang will pass to him that did the wrong,

Whene’er it chanced, and sold his heart for naught.

Now must your hands be washed from things like
these,

The path of right ensued. Moreover wisdom

Approveth what accordeth best to manhood.

I have no difference with any one

Although such sought my crown and signet-ring.

The man of high birth and of noble nature

Will speak but right. Your safety is assured :

I will not work the works of Ahriman.”’

All those that heard the Shah blessed crown and

throne,

And going forth rejoicing praised his fortune,

While he descended from the throne of might

Right glad and mused upon Hurmuzd all night.

§ 3

How Khusrau Parwiz visited his Father and asked
Forgiveness

Now when the ebon Veil had disappeared,

And in the distance cock-crow reached the ear,
The winner of the world with stricken heart,

And deeply sorrowful, approached his sire,

On seeing him lamented, did obeisance,

And tarried long with him. Khusrau Parwiz,
Beholding his sire’s face, sighed deeply, kissed

His eyes and head and feet, then said to him

With full heart and with face all wet with tears :—
‘““ My father, fortune’s mate, thou memory

Of Nushirwan ! thou know’st that none had pricked

Google
<pb n="199"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 199

Thy finger had I been but there to help thee.
See what thou wilt command me; grief hath come
Upon thee and my heart is full. IZf now
Thou biddest I am at thy gate a slave
To guard thy head. I seek not crown, I want
Not host, and lay my head before thy throne.”
Hurmuzd replied: “‘O prudent one! my day
Of misery will pass from me, and he
That perpetrated this will soon be gone :
Both trouble and delight are transient.
I ask three things of thee, no more, and one
Is that each morning at the break of day
Thou wilt delight mine ears with thine own voice ;
The second is that thou wilt send to me
Some noble cavalier scarred with long fight
To talk to me of warfare and the chase,
And some old sage to hold discourse of kings,
And bring to me the records to abate
My pain and misery ; and my third wish
Is that thy mother’s brothers, who are not
Thine equals but thy slaves, shall never see
The world henceforth: discharge thy wrath on them
For all this grief.”
**O king !”’ he made reply,
‘“ May that man perish who deploreth not
Thine eyes and be thy foes, though their ill deeds
Be secret, banished from the world, but still
Consider in that lucid mind of thine:
Bahram Chubina hath been paladin
While with him there are countless forcees—horsemen
And gallant sworders—and if we lay hand
On Gustaham no refuge will be left us ;
But as regardeth an old scribe to read
The annals, and some war-primed cavalier,
Skilled in the feast withal, I will dispatch
Such ever new to thee. Be no whit sad,

Google

C. 1869
<pb n="200"/>
200 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And hold not thou the action Gustaham’s ;
*Tis God’s because of senseless words and deeds.
May thy heart bear this anguish, and may patience
Consort with wisdom; but should fortune serve
I will myself exact complete revenge
On Gustaham and reprobate Bandwi,
And give them shroudless to the dogs to eat.
Be of good cheer, O son of Nushirwan !
And may thy soul be ever young.”’

He spake,
And left the presence weeping but reserved.
The son was kindlier-tempered than the king
In which regard a man of wisdom said :—
‘““ A bland youth, sweet-tongued, is a better friend
Than some fierce warrior ageing to his end,
Yet at the last dust is the common lot
Of one of parts and one that hath them not ;
Albeit to learn of one there is no need,
Who saith that wits and fools are of one breed,
For knowledge will ensure thy fair surcease,
And heaven in Paradise will give thee peace.
As victuals serve to keep the body whole,
So knowledge is all needful for the soul.
Cry to the Holy and Supreme in all,
And be all undismayed at great or small.”

§ 4

How Bahram Chubina heard of the Blinding of Shah
Hurmuzd and how he led his Troops against
Khusrau Parwiz

Bahram Chubina heard how fortune dealt
With that famed king: ‘“ They set the searing irons

Google
<pb n="201"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 201

To his bright eyes, and those two Lamps, those twin
Narcissi of his garth, are dead, his son
Is seated on his throne and his high fortune
Is trodden underfoot.”
Bahram Chubina,
The hero, was amazed, grew wan, and pondered.
He said: ‘* The time for me to fight hath come ;
By daring I will seize the world.”’
He bade

To bear forth to the field the kettledrums
And flag of majesty. He packed the baggage,
He called his warriors to horse and spake
Of waging war against Khusrau Parwiz.
His host, as *twere a moving mountain, marched
Audaciously as far as Nahrawan.
Khusrau Parwiz, on hearing, was in dudgeon
At such swift action and sent spies to note
The progress of events with these behests :—
‘* We first must learn the feeling of his troops:
If like Bahram Chubina they intend
To fight or whether we shall have delay,
And whether he be foremost at the centre
Or at the wings, his state at audience-time,
And if he hunteth while upon the march.”

They went unnoted by the troops, gat news,
And came back to the Shah all privily.
They said: “ His troops are for Bahram Chubina,
All from the highest chieftains to the boys.
In marching he is sometimes at the centre,
And sometimes with the right or left or baggage.
We saw him long of sight and diligent—
A cautious warrior and cavalier.
His kinsmen all are in his confidence ;
He hath no need of strangers, giveth audience
In royal fashion, hunteth on the plain
With cheetahs, knoweth but the usages

Google

C. 1870
<pb n="202"/>
C. 1871

202 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Of Shahs, and readeth all the book of Dimna.’”!

Khusrau Parwiz said to his minister :—
“A long task faceth us. Bahram Chubina,
When he is charging at an enemy,
Would break the hearts of dragons in the deep,
And from the monarch of the world withal
Hath learned the methods of the kings of kings,
While, thirdly, with Kalila,? so to speak,
As minister none hath so shrewd a scribe.”’

Then said he to Bandwi and Gustaham :—
‘** Our mates are grief and toil.”

Now when Gurdwi,
Darman, the monarch of Armenia,
Shapur and Andaman, shrewd chiefs and fighters,
Were set in secret conclave with the Shah
He thus addressed them: ‘‘ Mighty warriors !
When wisdom is a light within the brain
Then knowledge is the body’s coat of mail,
Which naught except the sword of death will sever,
A sword whereto a steel helm is as wax.
I am but young to you so cannot walk
The world aright ; instruct me what to do.
Who suffereth from these wounds ?”’
An archmage said :—

‘** Thou wilt be happy and the Grace and provand
Of empty brains. Now since the mystery
Of this our whirling world grew manifest
Hath wisdom been disparted into four.
One portion is the king’s for Grace and wisdom
Fit him; another is the pious man’s ;
The third the loyal hege’s who as near
The royal person tendereth advice ;
The wise account the small part left the thane’s.
The impious and unthankful have no wisdom.
If now the king will hear the old sage’s words,

> The Fables of Bidpai. See Vol. vii. p. 382. ' Id.

Google
<pb n="203"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 203

And fix his heart’s eye on them, he will eat
Their fruit when they have passed within his heart.”’
The Shah replied: “‘ Were I to write this down
In gold its Grace and vogue would ask no less ;
The archimages’ utterances are gems,
But I have other purposes at heart,
For when our two hosts meet, and when our spearheads
Shall reach to Gemini, I shall not be
Blamed if I quit the centre and advancing
Before the host call to Bahram Chubina,
That impious and self-seeking general,
Show him a peaceful face, make much of him,
And praise him. If he shall receive my words
Tis well, for who at court can be his peer ?
But if he seeketh fight I too will fight,
And range my host against his.”
All the leaders
Assented to his scheme, the great applauded,
And hailed him king of earth; all said: “Oh! be
The ills of fortune far from thee, O king!
Be victory, Grace, majesty, and crown
Of king of kings thine own.”
He answered thus :—
“So be it; enough. May none of us behold
Disunion or defeat.”’
Then from Baghdad,
And with new camp-enclosures, he marched forth
Upon the plain. As the two powers drew near
Upon the march, the captain of the host’s
On that side and on this the Shah's, and when
The world’s light had been taken in the toils,
And pitchy night had shaken out its locks,
Scouts went forth from both hosts to guard the
approaches ;
And when night, frighted by the sword of day
Had fled dry-lipped and quaking, rose the din

Google
<pb n="204"/>
C. 1872

204 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Of tymbals from both camps and Sol led forth

To war. Then at the Shah’s command Bandwi

And Gustaham put on their iron helms,

And went with other chiefs of ardent soul

Toward the canal! of Nahrawan, whereat

The outpost came before Bahram Chubina,

And said: “ There is a force two bowshots off.”
On hearing this he ranged his host and called

His veterans and bestrode a piebald steed

With musk-black tail—a noble caracoller

With brazen hoofs. An Indian scimitar

Sufficed to arm him, and its stroke was like

The levin from the cloud. He urged his horse

As ’twere a lightning-flash. That miscreant,

Izid Gashasp, was on his left. Withal

There came Hamdan Gashasp? and Yalan-sina,

All rage and enmity, while three bold Turks,

Sprung from the Khan, made ready to take vengeance

Upon Khusrau Parwiz and swore: ‘“ When we

- Shall see the Shah out-distancing his troops,

Him will we bring to thee in bonds or slain,
And thy realm shall repose in peace.”

On one side
There was Khusrau Parwiz and on the other
The paladin, between was Nahrawan,
While on both sides the armies watched them meet,
And how the paladin the Shah would greet.

§5
How Khusrau Parwiz and Bahram Chiuibina met and

parleyed

Bahram Chubina and Khusrau Parwiz
Thus met, one cheerful and the other grim.

1‘ Spring ’’ in the original. * Reading with P.

Google
<pb n="205"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 20

qn

The world-lord rode an ivory grey and wore

A gold and jewelled crown ; his robe from Chin

Was of brocade of gold. Gurdwi as guide

Preceded him, Bandwi and Gustaham

Were at his side, and therewithal Kharrad,

Son of Barzin, who wore a helm of gold.

They all were clad in iron, gold, and silver ;

Their golden girdles were occult with gems.

Bahram Chubina paled with rage on seeing

The king of kings and thus addressed his chiefs :—
“This whoreson miscreant from low estate

And boorish manner hath attained to manhood,

Grown powerful and girt himself for action.

The writing of the down is manifest

Upon the ivory rondure of his face ;

So now he hath become Shah Faridtn

With mace and crown and caught the imperial style,

But speedily will this world end for him.

This dark-souled bastard leadeth on his troops

Like Nushirwan. Scan thoroughly his host

To see if there be of it one of name.

I cannot spy one warlike cavalier . C

That could confront me for a single breath.

Now shall he look upon the deeds of men,

Steeds charging, scimitars, the dust of war,

The clash of battle-axes, showers of arrows,

The heroes’ shouts, the captives, give and take.

The elephants are driven from the field

When I march forth to battle. At our voice

The mountains melt and warriors lose their prowess.

I take the rivers with my sword and turn

Their waters into blood.”’

. 1873

He spake and spurred
His pied steed, thou hadst said: “ His flying eagle.”
He chose himself a narrow battlefield,
The troops in wonder watching him, and thence

Google
<pb n="206"/>
206 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Went on to Nahrawan and there confronted
The glorious Great with certain of [ran,
Armed for the conflict with Khusrau Parwiz,
Who said: “O noble chiefs ! who recogniseth
Bahram Chubina ? ”
Said Gurdwi: ‘‘O king!
Observe the warrior on the piebald steed,
With white juppon, black baldrick, and who rideth
About among the troops.”’
He recognised
The man at sight and said: ‘‘ Yon lengthy one,
Smoke-hued and riding on the noble piebald ? ”’
Gurdwi replied : ‘ The same and bent on ill.”
‘If thou shouldst question,” said Khusrau Parwiz,
“* That crook-back he would answer churlishly ;
With that hooked nose and half shut eyes * he hath,’
Thou wouldest say, ‘a wrathful heart.’ Thou seest
That he is wicked by his looks, God’s foe.
I mark naught of submission in his head,
And that none will command him.”
To Bandwi
And Gustaham he said thereafter: “ I
Will give an illustration of this saw :—
* If ‘neath the load the donkey will not pass
Then take the weighty burden to the ass.’
If some bold div hath gulled Bahram Chubina
How should he see God’s way ? All hearts that ache
With greed are helped not by the advice of wisdom.
When thou goest forth to war debate is over.
We must consider all from first to last :
Who knoweth which will conquer in the fight,
Which host be doleful or illustrious ?
Considering those troops so well arrayed,
And with a leader eager for the fray,
Such as Bahram Chubina is—a man
Gmm as a lusty div—and militants

Google
<pb n="207"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 207

Like ravening wolves, I will, with your consent,
So that disgrace may not attach to me,
Be first to make advances; ‘twill be better
For me than showing slackness in the fight.
If I receive from him a fair reply
His late misdoings shall be obsolete ;
I will bestow some corner of the world
Upon him and by bounty earn his thanks ;
Our warfare and endeavours in the field
Shall end in peace—a gain to us. No doubt
The wisest course is safest. Good folk joy
When monarchs act as merchants do.”’
“O king!”
Said Gustaham, “ live happily while time
Shall last. Thou scatterest gems in talk and art
More wise. Do what thou willest. Thou art just,
And yon slave is unjust ; thy head is full
Of brains and his of wind.”
Khusrau Parwiz,
On hearing this, advanced before his troops,
Held distant parle with brave Bahram Chubina,
And sought for feast in war-time. Thus he said :—
‘* Illustrious man! what business hast thou here
Upon the battlefield ? Thou art as though
The jewel of the court, the wealth of throne
And diadem, the army’s prop in war-time,
And as a bright light at our festivals.
Thou art ambitious, brave, and servest God;
Ne’er may the Almighty take His hand from thee.
I have considered of thy case, approved
Thine acts, will entertain thee and thy troops,
And make my soul glad by the sight of thee.
I will appoint thee general of fran,
As is but right, and I will pray to God
For thee.”
When brave Bahram Chubina heard

Google

C. 1874
<pb n="208"/>
C. 1875

208 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI!

He gave his black-tailed, piebald steed the rein,
Saluted from his seat, paused, and replied :—
“In good case, blithe, and fortunate am I,
And may the day of greatness ne’er be thine,
Who knowest not kingship whether just or not.
The Alans’ king in the conduct of his kingship
Is being helped by the unfortunate !
I have considered of thy case and suppled
A lasso for thy sake. I will erect
Forthwith a lofty gibbet, make thy hands
Fast in the coils, and hang thee up thereon
As thou deservest, giving thee a glimpse
Of fortune’s bitterness.”
Khusrau Parwiz
Heard and his cheeks became like fenugreek.
He knew: “ Bahram Chubina will not yield,
And part with crown and throne,” and thus replied :—
‘““ Ingrate! No good man would speak thus. When
guests
Come to thy house from far dost thou revile them
At feasting-time ? This note is not the wont
Of Shahs or of the exalted cavaliers.
No Arab and no Persian e’er have acted
Like this in thirty centuries. The wise
Would shame hereat, so go not thou about
The door of thanklessness. When guests give thee
A glorious greeting one must be a div
To answer as thou dost. Ill days, I fear,
Await thee for thou knowest that thy counsels
Are troubled. Thy resource is in the hands
Of that Great King who liveth ever more,
Whose word is law. Thou sinnest in His sight,
And art ingrate, with person in disgrace,
And heart in fear. In calling me the king
Of the Alans thou takest but one side
Of my descent unless I am unworthy

Google
<pb n="209"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 209

Of king of kingship and the cap of power
As having for my grandsire Nushirwan,
And for my sire Hurmuzd. Whom knowest thou
More worthy ?”’

Said Bahrd4m Chubina: ‘* Wretch,
And mad in deed and word ! first, for thy talk
Of guests: thou art thyself new-fangled though
Thy talk is of the past. What have the words
Of Shahs to do with thee ? Thou art no sage,
Or valiant cavalier. Thou wast the Alans’ king,
And now though thou art chief thou art withal
Inferior to the slave of slaves. Thou art
A fruitless evil-doer in the world; |
No Shah art thou or fit to lead the mighty ;
But me men bless as Shah. I will not let thee
Set foot on earth. Moreover, when I said :—
* Thou art ill-starred, unfit for rule and kingship,’
I said it, worthless Shah! and may the state
Be never thine! because the Iranians
Are foes of thine, will struggle to uproot thee,
Will rend the, skin and veins, and give the dogs
Thy bones to eat.”

Khusrau Parwiz replied :-—
‘*“ Knave ! why so fierce and haughty, for foul words
Disgrace a man? But from the very first
Thy disposition hath been thus; clear wisdom
Is severed from thy brain. Blest is the noble
That eateth wisdom’s fruits! Fey divs discourse
At large. I would not have a paladin
Like thee made weak and ruined by his temper.
I prithee banish anger from thy heart,
Be not so moved and charm away thy wrath.
Remember God, the just Possessor ; base
Thy wisdom on His justice. Thou hast now
A height before thee higher than Bistun,
And if a king shall ever come of thee

VOL. VIII. O

Google
<pb n="210"/>
210 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

The Egyptian thorn will bear. Thy heart is full
Of thoughts of rule but we shall see what God
Ordaineth. Who hath taught thee such ill carriage,
Such principles of Ahriman, I know not,
But thy colloguer seeketh for thy death.”
He spake and lighting from his ivory steed,
And taking from his head the precious crown,
Walled with his face turned sunwards, put his hope
In God, and said: “ O glorious Judge who bringest
The tree of hope to fruit! Thou knowest who
Is now affronting me, Thy slave, and how
We should for very shame bewail the crown.
If royalty is to desert our race
I will not strive but be a thrall within
A Fane of Fire and live on milk and herbs,
Hoard neither gold nor silver and at prayer-time
Wear woollen; but if rule is to be mine
Thee will I serve in truth and equity.
Oh! let my host prevail, give not my crown
And palace to a slave. If I succeed,
And haste to bring before Azargashasp!
Crown, steed, and armlets, earrings, torque, and robe
Of gold adorned with gems, and pour withal
Upon the dome of lapis-lazuli
A hundred sacks of red dinars, and give
The worshippers five thousand score of drachms,
When I become the monarch of the world,
Then will I strive to reinstate some city
Unjustly desolated and the haunt
Of onager and lion, leave it not
To thorns and weeds, but send on my return
From battle five score thousands of dinars.
Those of the scions of Bahram and others
That shall be brought to me as prisoners

? 1.e., when according to Sasanian custom he makes his pilgrimage
to the Fire-temple at Shiz. Cf. Vol. i. p. 60.

Google
<pb n="211"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 211

Will I make servants of the glorious Fire,
And glad the hearts of priest and archimage.”’

He spake these words and rose up from the dust ;
That speaker sore-oppressed was justified.
Swift as a dust-cloud from the place of prayer
He came and shouted to Bahram Chtubina :—
* Thou hellish, div-like slave remote from wisdom,
And far removed from precedent and Grace !
Some rabid, tyrannous, and lusty div
Hath blinded thee. Thou hast, in wisdom’s stead,
Wrath and revenge, and won the divs’ applause.
A thornbrake is a city, Hell a garden
To thee; the lamp of wisdom hath died out
Within thy brain and robbed thy mind and heart
Of lustre. It was but a lying witch
That led thee thus through greatness to a fall.?
To-day thou settest hand upon a shoot
With leaves of bane and fruit of colocynth.
Thy stock ne’er so aspired nor is the ‘aspirant
Applauded. God hath not bestowed on thee
The Grace and stature. Hast forgot Gurgin,
Son of Milad ?2 Thou unjust wretch! ne’er hope
For what will never be. The crab hath not
The eagle’s wing nor doth the eagle soar
Aloft the sun. By holy God, by throne
And crown if I shall come upon thee hostless,
And if I blow a chilling blast upon thee . . .!
Thou hast not seen me yet in fight and I
Have heard but thy harsh words. I lean on Him
That giveth victory. If I am unworthy
To be a king let me not live a liege.”

Bahram Chiubina said: ‘ Thou fool possessed !
Thy sire, that world-lord friendly to the Faith,
Who ne’er blew cold on anyone, thou knewest not

' Cf. p. 150 seq,
2 Cf. Vol. iii. p. 292 seq. and p. 72.

Google

C. 1877
<pb n="212"/>
C. 1878

212 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUST

To prize but flungest vilely from the throne,
And thou wouldst fain be world-lord after him,
Be vigilant and wise! Thou art impure,
God’s foe, and wilt experience naught but ill
From Him that giveth good, while if Hurmuzd
Had been unjust and time and earth exclaimed
Against him ’tis not fit for thee, his son,
To king it in [ran and in Turan.
Thy life will not be passed upon the throne ;
Content thee with the charnel for thou art
Afar from fortune. For Hurmuzd will I
Exact revenge; moreover, I am king
Within fran. Now make this clear to me:
What upright man agreed that thou shouldst sear
The eyes of Shahs or bid one do the deed ?
Take thou henceforth the kingship to be mine
From Sun to Fish’s back.’”!

Khusrau Parwiz
Replied: ‘‘ May his sire’s woe ne’er jov this slave.
Thus was it written and what was to be
Hath been; how long wilt thou add word to word ?
Thou makest thyself king, thou who at death
Wilt not possess a shroud! So far as folk,
And barded steeds can go thou art a monarch—
In expectation—but thou hast no house,
Home, land, and birth; thou art a windbag king.
With thy false title and such wares as these
Thou wilt not shine upon the royal throne.
There have been brave men ere thy time—aspirants
With massive maces—yet they never sought
The kingship, being lieges, nor pretended
To crown and throne, but thou becomest ever
More rabid and art lost to modesty.?
The World-lord maketh kings for justice-sake,
Or for their parts or on account of birth,

' See Vol. i, p. 71. * Couplet omitted

Google
<pb n="213"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 213

Bestowing kingship on the worthiest,
The wisest or the least injurious.
My sire made me the monarch of the Alans
Since through thy wiles he was concerned for me,
And now God hath bestowed on me the kingship,
Throne, greatness, and the crown of power. I have
them
From Him who is the Master of the world,
From Him who knoweth all, by the appointment
Of king Hurmuzd who from his sire received
The throne as heirloom, from high priest and sages,
The mighty men and the experienced chiefs,
According to the Faith which once Zarduhsht,
The wise and ancient, brought from Paradise,}
And gave Luhrasp the word of God, which he
Accepted and transmitted to Gushtasp.
All those that have aggrieved me, all whose treasures
I have received, are under my protection,
Be they my friends or foes. The mendicants
At lurk from wasted cities will I make
Rich, be they outcasts or of mine own kin,
And bramble-brakes like Paradise, fulfilled
With men, with cattle, and with tilth, ignore,
By way of compensation, no good thing
Until we quit this world for that, will make
Our heart the scales, will weigh, and use the might
Of our own arm. What time Hurmuzd, the world-lord,
Ruled justly, earth and time rejoiced in him.
The son past doubt should have his father’s throne,
Should have the crown, the girdle, and the fortune,
But as for thee, thou wicked, crafty man,
Who wast the first to war against Hurmuzd !
No ill hath come unless by thy command,
Thy spells, thy guile, and plotting. If God will
I will make dark in vengeance for the Shah
1 See Vol. v., p. 33.

Google

. 1879
<pb n="214"/>
214 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

Bright Sol to thee. Now who deserveth crown,
And if not I who is there.? ”’
** Valiant one !”’

Rejoined Bahram Chubina, “ he is worthy
That carried off from thee the sovereignty.
When, from the daughter of Papak, Ardshir
Was born, and the Ashkanians had the swav,
Grew he not mighty and slew Ardawan,
Whose throne he won? And now five hundred years
Have passed by and Sasanian heads and crowns
Are waxing cold. Now is my day for throne
And diadem ; the headship and the work,
Allied with conquering fortune, are for me.
When I behold thy fortune, face, and troops,
Thy crown and throne, like some led lion roused
Will I abolish the Sasanians,
Erase them from the roll and trample down
Sasan, both head and crown. The power should be
The Ashkanians’ if the wise would hear aright.”

Khusrau Parwiz replied: ‘* Contentious fool !
If kingship is for those of royal race
What dost thou in their midst ? What are the folk
Of Rai but double-faced ? And what as men ?
But few at first they joined Sikandar’s host,
And arming on the Rumans’ side soon won
The Kaian throne. It did not please the Maker,
And ruin came upon them from themselves ;
The Judge that giveth succour crowned Ardshir,
And he was worthy of the royal crown
Although he had no treasure and dinars.
Those great men’s work hath passed away, our words
Are wind. God choosing him for sovereignty
Saw naught but good in him. Now who deserveth
The government and who shall be the lord
Of this unstable world ? Inform me truly,
Choose the good path and shun perversity.”

Google
<pb n="215"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 215

Bahram Chubina hearing changed his ground,
And said: ‘* I am Bahram, the warrior,
The rooter up of kings.”’

Khusrau Parwiz

Made answer: “ Thou hast heard the sage’s saw :—
* The equipage of greatness ne’er commit
To mean or wayward folk of little wit,
For they, when they have got it from thee, take
Their ease and if thou ask it back they quake.’
My father, who was rash and ill-advised,
Discerned not close from open and among
His many great and small gave men of straw
The royal equipage which came not back
Upon demand for he that was possessed
Thereof had grown intoxicate thereby.
What was the saying of the sweet-voiced sage ?
* ‘Twill cause thee pain and toil to stablish men
Unstable: woo not the ungrateful then.’
Thou wast a brave man, keen and of high aims,
But thine ill nature made thee an ill-doer.
My father made thee first among the chiefs ;
Thou wast the greatest in the sovereignty ;
But royal favour and the silvern throne
Have made thee drunk and err. The name Chubina
Is now Bahram, the silvern throne become
A snare to thee. There seated thou art fain
To mount the moon; thou wast the general,
And wouldst be Shah. No sage e’er held such talk ;
I wot that thou consortest with the Div.”

Bahram Chubina answered: “ Evil one!
Reviling is thy sole accomplishment.
Thou heedest not God’s covenant, thou seekest
This state whereof thou art not worthy, and blindest
The Shah! How can such deeds as these be hidden ?
Thy friends are hostile, being thine in word,
But mine in heart. The Khan is mine ally

Google

C. 1880
<pb n="216"/>
C. 1881

216 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

With all the armies of [ran and Chin,
For I am just and kindly with a hand
And sword. No enemy will conquer me.
I will transfer the power from Pars to Rai,
And ban the name of Kaian, set up justice,
And reinstate the customs of Milad.}
I spring from famed Arash? and am in war
A fire unquenchable, the grandson I
Of great Gurgin and the consuming Flame
Upon Barzin. It was king Sawa’s mind
To leave not in [ran throne, crown, or signet,
To rase the Fanes of Fire and suffer not
Naurtiz and Sada feast. The Iranians too
Were all enslaved till I girt up my loins,
And by an arrow from my bow determined
King Sawa’s life. If thou knowest not the sum
Of that rash monarch’s troops go count a thousand
Four hundred times. Twelve hundred elephants
Of war had he. Thou wouldst have said: ‘The
earth
Will hold them not.’ That great host fled while I
Roared like a lusty lion in their rear.
Know thou that none without accomplishment
Doth rashly seek the seat of mighty men.
My helmet savoureth of the crown, my sword
Will win the ivory throne, but if a gnat
Shall war with thee ’twill bring thee from thy throne
To earth.”
Khusrau Parwiz replied: ‘' Thou luckless !
Why not be mindful of Gurgin at Rai,
Whom fortune never succoured in the world,
And who had not throne, majesty, and state ?
None knew thy name; thou wast obscure and poor.
The great Mihran Sitad came and informed
The monarch of the age about thee, thus

1 Cf. p. 72. - ? See Vol. vi. p. 197.

Google
<pb n="217"/>
“ KHUSRAU PARWIZ 217

Exalting thee from darksome dust, but thou

Hast lost sight of that day! He furnished thee

With treasures, arms, and troops, and Rustam’s
banner

Resplendent as the moon. God did not will

That Turkmans out of Chin should waste fran,

And helped thee in the fight with them; thy helm

Rose cloudward since the Lord of circling heaven

Willed the Great King success ; but thou dost take

The merit to thyself who never sawest

The great and good. If kingship is to quit

The Kaian race why girdest thou thy loins ?

’*T will need one like Sikandar to obscure

The fortune of the king of kings. Mayst thou

With thy div’s face and dusty hue attain

To naught except a ditch. Thy waywardness

And conduct dimmed the Shah’s days. Thou hast
put

My name on drachms and striven to ruin me.

Thou art ill’s source in this world and supreme

Among transgressors. Whereso blood is shed

The guilt is thine. Thou wilt not find by night

In slumber what thou seekest for all day

Beneath the sun. O luckless and unjust !

Give not thy whole time to perversity,

Inflict not rashly outrage on thyself,

And so remain unjust and miserable.

Think how to gain God’s favour and make wisdom

And truth thy task for what is mine and thine

Will pass ; time reckoneth our every breath.

Who will declare, when thou hast decked thy
heart

With guile, that guile is better than the right ?

At thy behest whate’er thou wilt is thine,

Thine to one half the realm. Then in this world

Thou wilt be happy, all at ease, and far

Google
<pb n="218"/>
218 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

C. 1882, From hurt of foes, and when this Wayside Inn
Thou quittest thou wilt pass un-irked. No need
To labour this, for in the Zandavasta
Thus saith Zarduhsht: ‘ He that abandoneth
The holy Faith hath neither fear nor awe
Of God within his heart. Let him be counsclled
For one year: if thy counsel profit not
Let him be slain by order of the Shah,

And his offending corpse flung on the road :

But if he is the Shah’s own enemy

Let him be slain forthwith.’ Men in good sooth

Will shed thy blood for thy perverted fortune

Requireth this. Now will a wretched life

Be thine and Fire thy place when thou departest.

If thou continuest long thus to revolt

From Shah and from God’s justice there will come

Remorse for thine unseemly words and deeds.

Thou ailest and the drug for thee is counsel ;

I am endeavouring to make thee whole,

But if desire and envy rule thy heart

Say so and I will send a different leech.

Thy victories had made thee somebody,

But thoughts of treasure caused thee to rebel.

Heard hast thou that Zahhak was impious,

That divs and warlocks filled the world with fear,

And how when he had vexed the nobles’ hearts

The glorious Faridun entreated him.?

Thy troops, alive or dead, are all my slaves

At heart. Through thee they have obtained some
glory,

And so have turned their heads from right, but when

I shall display my treasures, and incline

The warriors’ hearts, not one of all this host

Will bide with thee because thou hast not name,

Or Grace or goods. When thou didst overcome

* Couplet omitted. * Vol. i. p. 168 sea.

Google
<pb n="219"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 219

King Sawa all the troops believed that they
Would never see defeat, they were so drunk
And satiate with spoil. Thy warriors,
So fearless, must not perish by my hand ;
I would not that the country of fran
Should lose this mighty warrior-host—all chiefs
And nobles—and defeat befall the throne
Of might. Now tell me, in Arish’s! days
Who was the Shah for this may end our parley ?”’
Bahram Chubina answered : “ Minuchihr
Was then the Shah and had the host and crown.”
Khusrau Parwiz replied: ‘ Ill-natured one !
Thou know’st that he was monarch of the world ;s
Know’st thou not that Arish was but his slave,
And bowed to his directions and commands ?
Just so it was with valiant Kai Khusrau
With such as Rustam for his officer,
For Rustam might have seized the world, the throne,
And style of Shah, but held to precedent,
And never glanced that way. Then why dost thou
Not follow me and hail Khusrau Parwiz
As Shah ? Thou dust-face! thou art but a div,
Like Ahriman; the crown and throne of Shahs
Have stirred thy greed.”
Bahram Chubina said :—
“Thou miscreant ! rightly art thou from Sasan,
Who was a shepherd and was shepherd-born ;
Papak was not the first to make him one.’
Khusrau Parwiz replied: “ Thou evil-doer !
Thine arrogance is not Sasan’s. Thy words
Are wholly lies, and falsehood is no honour.
Thou comest of bad-natured, worthless men,

And spring’st not from Sasan.”’
1 See Vol. v. p. 12.
* According to both the traditions given in the Shahnama

Sasan’s ancestors had been shepherds or in similar menial employ-
ment for generations. See Vols. v. p. 291, vi. 211.

Google

C. 1883
<pb n="220"/>
C. 1884

220 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

** The shepherdship,”’

Bahram Chubina answered, ‘“* of Sdasan
Ne’er will be hidden.”’

Said Khusrau Parwiz :—
‘“* Dara, when dying, gave not to Sasan
The crown of majesty. Though lost was fortune
Was lineage lost ? No talk will turn injustice
To justice. Seek’st thou, having for thine own
Such prudence, rede, and Grace, the imperial throne ?”’

§ 6

How Bahram Chibina and Khusrau Parwiz returned,
how Gurdya advised Bahrdm Chiubina, and how
Khusrau Parwtz told his Purpose to the [rdnians

He spake and smiled, turned from Bahram Chubina,

And set his face towards his host. Of those

Three valiant Turks who served the Khan of Chin,

Were savage as a wolf and had assured

Bahram Chibina: ‘‘ We, to win renown,

Will on the day of battle bring to thee

The person of the Shah alive or dead

Before the troops,’’? one impious horseman, strong,

Fierce, fearless, rushed forth seeking fight and grim

With sixty coils of lasso on his arm,

And drawing near that steed of ivory,

And aiming at the splendid crown, flung forth

His lasso coiled, and caught the Shah’s crowned head ;

But Gustaham clave with his sword the lasso,

The Shah’s head ’scaped from harm, while brave
Bandwi

Strung up his bow and with his arrows robbed

1p. 204.

Google
<pb n="221"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 2

tw
to |

The air of light. He loosed a poplar shaft
Against the Turk; that battle-seeker fled, |
And to that miscreant said Bahram Chutbina :—
‘* Be sombre dust thine only hiding-place !
Who said: ‘Assail the Shah ?’ Didst thou not see
me

Upstanding in his presence with respect ?’ ’

Sick, mind and body, he returned to camp.
His sister heard of his return, put off
Her splendid crown and, when a slave had brought
Her veil, ran forth in dudgeon sore of heart
To meet him and thus spake: “ O warlike chief !
How didst thou fare, say, with Khusrau Parwiz ?
If he be hot and hasty through his youth
Relax no effort in the cause of peace.”

The brave Bahram Chubina answered thus :—-
‘* One must not reckon him among the Shahs.
No valiant cavalier or sage is he,
Not generous or brilliant. Parts are better
Than birth, and kings should have them.”

His wise sister

Replied: ‘ O shrewd, ambitious chief! if I
Say much thou wilt not hear me but display
Ill-temper and ill-nature. Call to mind
The saying of the aphorist of Balkh :—
‘When any one shall truth from hiding bring,
And tell thy faults, truth is a bitter thing.’
Think not to waste thy country for thou hast
Thy share of earth. A very wise man said :—
‘To have an ox’s horn an ass once tried,
And lost forthwith his ears on either side.’
Court not the world’s reproach ; none of thy race
Hath worn the crown. Had this youth intervened not
I had not been thus seared and dark of soul ;
But as it is his sire is living, the throne
Of sovereignty is still in place yet thou

Google
<pb n="222"/>
222 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Must interfere! How it will end I know not,

But all night long mine eyes are filled with blood.
Thine only aim is pain and malison ;

Thou sniffest rashly at a poison-flower.

How folk will call Chubina infamous,

The name Bahram disfame! God will be wroth
Withal and Hell the prison of thy soul.

The world is not for every one, my brother !

And naught abideth save a fair renown.

Consider now, who was it sought thee out

Save king Hurmuzd ? But since king Sawa’s throne
And goods came to thy hands thou didst assume
The crown, and having grown renowned through him
Art seeking for the imperial throne ; but know

That every good thing is from God and be

Not ingrate to our Shah; presume not thus

Upon thy stricken fields. Thou hast gained honour,
But be not arrogant. Thou hast at heart

Consorted with the Div and hast grown guilty

In God’s sight. When Hurmuzd was wroth and raved
Through what the foul Ayin Gashasp had said

Thou shouldest have been patient and not made it
A liege’s opportunity for war ;

And in his great affliction when his son

Came forth to fight from Barda’ ’twas thy duty

To visit the young Shah and ornament

His new throne as he wished. The youth had then
Adopted thine advice and thou hadst not

Seen evil days but quiet, joy, and triumph.

Why these designs upon the crown and throne ?
Thou knowest that there still are princes left,

Both old and young, descended from Ardshir,

With wealth and countless hosts. Who in fran

Will hail thee king ? If any king with treasure

And troops could dare to eye this land of ours

It had been Sawa, prince of Chin, none else,

Google
<pb n="223"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 223

Who marched upon the country of fran ;
But holy God made thee his opposite,
And saved our land and elders. Since the World-lord
Made this world and spread over it high heaven
Men have not seen a cavalier like Sam,
Whom not the rending lion would confront,
Yet when it happened that Naudar became
Unjust and trampled on his father’s ways,
And when the nobles called on Sam and had
The turquoise throne made ready, ‘ God forbid,’
He said, * that ever captain of the host
Should contemplate the throne because the dust
Of Mintchihr is mine, my coronet
The footings of Naudar’s.”? I recognise
In Sam thy better; he sought not the kingship,
Not being ill-conditioned. So too Zal
And elephantine Rustam never sought
To rule our folk. Know, I have said this, brother !
Because the fortunate alone who hath
August hands, Grace, and high birth, and is wise,
Of ardent heart and just can take the throne.
I know not what will come on thee, for wisdom
Hath vanished from thy heart ! ”

Bahram Chubina
Made answer: “ ’Tis all true and holy God
Is witness, but the thing hath gone too far ;
My heart and brain are sick with greed and I
Must grow whole or resign my head to death,
Which pierceth helms of steel. If I am stricken
By this young Shah my troops will take from him
His throne and, black at heart with vengeance, set
Another there.”’

The youthful king for his part

Recrossed the bridge of Nahrawan, rejoicing,
Called all the captains of the host, set those

* See Vol. 1. p. 340.

Google

C. 1886
<pb n="224"/>
224 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Entitled by their rank beside the throne

Of sovereignty, and said: “ Good-hearted chiefs,

Adept and veteran! of this my kingship

This is my primal act—a mere essay—

And none doth owe us praise though our intent

Be good, and ye have had no good from us

While we must now augment your toils and griefs.

Ye served mine ancestors and have seen much

Of this world’s salts and sours. I will disclose

My purpose, hidden from the host, to you ;

My words must go no further, that would mar

My scheme if it were published to the troops.

I mean to lead the host to-night to battle,

For I have parleyed with Bahram Chubina,

Who is an active, skilful cavalier,

Though I discerned no wisdom in his head,

Or in the heads of his illustrious troops.

His fight with Sawa is his only theme,

He telleth o’er and o’er the same old tale.

He thinketh me a foolish youth and fain

Would frighten me with mace and scimitar,

Not knowing that I attack by night and so

Gain confidence. If ye will share the fray

With me I will not loiter but, when night

Shall steep her face in ambergris and loose

Her musky locks, do ye mount armed and grasping

The mace and scimitar.”’

They all agreed

To do the Shah’s behest. When he had gone

Back to his tent he put all strangers forth.

He sent for Gustaham and for Bandwi,

And for Gurdwi, a veteran warrior,

And told his purpose of a night-attack

In hopes that they would aid. Said Gustaham :—
C. 1887 “*Q king! why put such confidence in fight ?

A camisade may alienate thy troops.

Google
<pb n="225"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 225

Thy soldiers and the soldiers of the foe
Are one in heart and body ; on one side
Are grandsons, on the other grandsires. What
Deception can there be ? Here is a brother,
And there a father; they are all akin;
How shall son war with sire? Encourage not
The wishes of thy foes by this design.
This was no matter for the host ; thy words
Have ruined all.”’

Gurdwi said: ‘* All is over,
E’en as a wind that passeth o’er the plain.
Power, passion, treasury, and troops make err
A young man’s head. Do not be thou to-night
Upon the field and suffer not the host
And treasure to be lost, because I doubt not
That all our secret plans and preparations
Will be reported to the other side ;
Yield not thy head then to the enemy.”’

Pleased with the rede Khusrau Parwiz assented,
Selected certain chiefs devoted to him
For good and ill—Kharrdad, son of Barzin,

And Gustaham, the Lion, and Shapur,
And Andiyan, the valorous, Bandwi,
Kharrad, withal, the Lustre of the host,

Nastuh, the chief and burner up of heroes,
And others who would serve to guard the troops,
The treasure and himself. They sought a hill
That would avail if fight were toward—a place
All grass and apt for feasts. Khusrau Parwiz
Thence viewed the host from far.

Bahram Chiubina,
The brave, for his part mounted and when great
And small drew near he questioned of the
chiefs :—
‘* What tidings have ye of your kith and kin ?
Send to them, ye that have such—men at one
VOL. VII. P

Google
<pb n="226"/>
C. 1888

226 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

With you in word and Faith. If they will come
And do my will, and stake their lives as pledges
Of their sincerity, I will enrich them,

And they shall all be nobles like yourselves.

The troops from Barda’ and from Ardabil,

And slack Armenians—a band or two—

Remain. We fear them not in fight while those
From Barda’ are but as a pinch of dust.”

The chieftains heard what brave Bahram Chubina
Proposed and chose a warrior from the host,
Sage, fluent, heedful, who thus charged departed,
And speeding onward through the longsome night
Declared his message to the [ranian chiefs,

And heard their answer: “ Till the hosts engage
We will not leave Khusrau Parwiz. This matter,
We fear, will prove a long one. He will make

A night-attack, so feel not ye secure.”

The envoy, hearing this, went swift as dust
Back to the army of the paladin,

And as a privy matter, every word,
He there reported all that he had heard.

$7
How Bahrdm Chibina attacked the Army of Khusrau
Parwiz by Night and how Khusrau Parwiz fled

Now when Bahram Chubina was aware

That all the troops were well disposed to him
His host lit watch-fires and set lights ablaze

In every quarter. Then that Lion chose

A valiant band fit to subdue the world,

Six thousand Sabres as the leaders reckoned.
Bahram Chubina told them: ‘“‘ When the drum
Shall beat at cock-crow raise the battle-cry,

Google
<pb n="227"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 227

Attack and crown the nobles’ heads with blood.”

Led by the three proud Turks the troops sped forth
At his command and full of spite and vengeance
Fell on the army of the king. Arose
A din of mace and sword and battle-ax,
The earth was iron and the clouds were dust.
The troops all asked: “‘ Where is Khusrau Parwiz ?
The day and victory to-day are ours.”

Khusrau Parwiz was on the hill in anguish,
His eyes were full of blood, his cheeks the hue
Of lapis-lazuli, and, till the shafts
Of dawn shot up, the clashing of the hosts
Confounded him, but when the dark night’s skirt
Had vanished, and he saw the battlefield
All killed and wounded, to his chiefs he said :—
‘Help and put forth your powers against the foe,
For God, the Victor, is mine aid and prop,
And now my work is blows and scimitar.”

He charged amain at those three Turks. Turks ?

Nay,
Three fierce and savage wolves. One closed with him,
Unsheathed his glittering glaive and sought to strike
The king upon the head ; the royal rider
Put up his shield to save it, thrust beneath
The guard, and laid his foeman low. “ Famed
fighters !
Slack not the struggle now,” he cried, but still
His troops all turned away, abandoning
That world-aspirant shamefully who then
Said to Bandwi and Gustaham: “ Hereof
I augur ill. I have no child grown up,
Or other kindred, fitted for the crown,
And if I should be slain in fight the world
Would have no king.”
Bandwi made answer thus :—

‘*O noble prince! may this world yearn in love

Google

C. 1889
<pb n="228"/>
228 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

For thee. Thy troops are gone, abide not thou,
For none is left to aid thee.”
To Gurdwi
Then said the king: “ Haste with Tukhar and
take

The tent-enclosure, treasure, and brocade,
Crown, captives, purses, and the ivory throne,
All that thou canst, and take a thousand horse
Of those still left.”

The nobles toiled to load,
And carry off, this treasure. Then appeared
A dragon-flag ; the world turned violet.
Behind the flag rode brave Bahram Chiubina,
Who robbed the world of lustre in the fray.
He and Khusrau Parwiz encountered,both
Redoubted warriors and savage lions.
Like elephants of war they raged and smote
Each other on the head. All lion-like
Bahram Chubina wheeled, his weapons failed
Against the foe, and thus till set of sun
The conflict passed all bounds. Then came Tukhar
To tell Khusrau Parwiz that he had drawn
The treasure and the baggage to the bridge,
Whereat the monarch said to Gustaham :—
“We have not any helpers in the fight ;
We are but ten; this is a mighty host,
And led on by a valiant paladin.
Although we have the Grace upon our side
We lack for friends, so flee we. Timely flight
Is better than affray. I may not tarry,
For I am all alone.”

The unpractised youth
Fared till he reached the bridge of Nahrawan,
Pursued all hotly by Bahram Chubina,
His head all vengeance and his heart all strife.
Khusrau Parwiz, when he perceived this, stopped

Google
<pb n="229"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 229

Upon the bridge and summoned to his presence
The veteran Gustaham. “ Bring me my bow,”
He said; “‘ ’tis mine interpreter in war.”

The treasurer, who was Gustaham himself,
Produced the bow.! The valiant chieftain took it,
And robbed the air of lustre with his shafts,
Showered them like hail and pegged with each a

helm
And head together. Then Bahram Chubina,
That Lion, charged with lasso in his hand
And Dragon under him. With lasso only
He passed behind Khusrau Parwiz who saw,
Rejoiced, strung up his bow and with a shaft
Struck on the breast Bahram Chubina’s horse ;
Its task was done. That general afoot
Despairing took his buckler while Yalan-sina
Advanced like dust and charged. The atheling,
Who knew him valiant, aimed and hurt his steed.
Yalan-sina fled from the bridge afoot,
And with him fled the rest, both old and young.
Now when Bahram Chubina thus withdrew
Khusrau Parwiz, swift as a dust-cloud, broke
The bridge and went to Taisaftn in dudgeon,
With pain at heart and eyes fulfilled with blood.
He barred the city-gates with iron bars,
Sat down amid a multitude of cares,
From every quarter called to him the Great,
And posted sentinels at every gate.

' ‘Son trésorier le lui apporta, et Gustehem était en cette
affaire le heutenant du roi.”’ Mohl.

Google

C. 1890
<pb n="230"/>
C. 1891

230 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

§ 8

How Khusrau Parwiz went to his Sire and fled to Rim,
and how Hurmuzd was slain

Thence weeping blood and liver-pierced he went
Before his sire, gave greeting, tarried long,
And said: “‘ The cavalier, the paladin,
Whom thou didst choose, O king ! came as do Shahs
That have the Grace and brought a numerous host.
I counselled him but "twas of no avail,
He only cared for war and conflict. Never
Be his name current! All against my will
Was fought a great fight, and the stars brought scath
On many. All my troops deserted me ;
Thou wouldst have said they saw and passed me by,
And, not reflecting, hailed Bahram Chubina
As Shah. Pursuing me he led his troops,
As ’twere a moving mountain, to the bridge
Of Nahrawan, and I, when mine estate
No longer flourished, fled and scaped the net
Of bale. As I account of gain and loss
The Arabs only may prove serviceable,
And, if the king bid, I will bring their horsemen
In countless numbers.”’

‘* This is ill-advised,”
Replied Hurmuzd, “ for now thou hast no standing.
To go to them is labour lost, for we
Possess not men, or arbalists or treasure.
The Arabs will not help when there is naught
To gain or lose but in despite and dudgeon
Will sell thee to thy foes, yet God will aid,
And smiling fortune side with thee. If thou
Wouldst quit this land depart with speed for Rum,
And tell to Cesar what this slave in straits

Google
<pb n="231"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 231

Hath said. He will. assist thee with his treasure
And troops. In that land are both men and stores,
And arms and host arrayed. Moreover all
That spring from Faridun are kin to thee,
And will assist thee in thy need.”
Thereat
Khusrau Parwiz kissed earth and gave the praises
Due to the Great. Then to Bandwi, Gurdwi,
And Gustaham he said: ‘ We must consort
With grief and toil. Take order, pack, and yield
Our country to the foe.”’
Said Gustaham :—
‘‘ Ne’er mayst thou see ill hap, O king!”
He answered :—
‘* The circling heaven produceth wrath and love
By turns.”’
With that the watchman cried: ‘‘O Shah,
Just and auspicious ! from the road hath risen
Dark dust. Amid a host a standard waveth
Charged with a dragon, and Bahram Chubina
Raised it beside the Nahrawan.”
Thereat
Khusrau Parwiz gat on his steed like smoke,
And fled like flying dust with that blue banner
Behind him. Turning him about he saw
Bandwi and Gustaham proceeding slowly,
And shouted to them in an angry tone :—
**O villains ! what hath happened that yon foes
Become like friends to you? If ’tis not so
Why ride at leisure with Bahram Chubina
Hard on your backs ?”
Bandwi replied: “O king!
Be not concerned at him; he will not see
Our dust, the host’s flag 1s too far away.
Thy friends all say there is no cause for haste
Because Bahram Chubina, when he reacheth

Google

C. 1892
<pb n="232"/>
232 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

The palace, will at once give to Hurmuzd
The crown and throne, will sit as minister
Beside him, and will angle to some purpose
By writing from his sovereign to Cesar
To this effect : ‘ A worthless slave hath fled
This country ; let him not obtain asylum
In Rum. Each time that he hath raised himself
He hath done hurt and damage to your land.
When he arriveth put him into bonds,
And fill with trouble his rejoicing heart.
Return him to this court and tarry not
Until he have grown great,’ and they will bind him,
And send him back in tears and strongly guarded.”
- Khusrau Parwiz heard this with troubled heart,
His cheek gloomed at their words and he replied :—
** Tll-fortune well may treat us thus, but words
Are long and deeds are strong; trust we in God.”

He urged his steed and said: ‘* What good and bad
The World-lord hath writ o’er our heads will come,
No musing can avert it. May our foes
Ne’er have their will.”

When he had gone the two
Unjust ones turned back eager for revenge.
Arrived, they sought the palace of the Shah,
All dudgeon and with hearts prepared for crime.
When they had passed the gate and reached the throne
They straightway took the string from off a bow,
Flung it forthwith around the monarch’s neck,
And hung his honoured person. Passed that crown
And throne of king of kings: thou wouldst have
said :—

‘“* Hurmuzd was never in the world at all.”’
The custom of revolving time it is

To furnish sometimes sweets and sometimes bane ;
Seek not for profit from a stock like this

Because the quest will bring thee naught but pain.

Google
<pb n="233"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 233

When thus Hurmuzd’s days ended and the throne,
That happy seat, remained unfilled, forthwith

Arose a sound of drums; those murderers’ cheeks
Became like sandarac. Upon the road

Bahram Chubina’s standard came in sight

Amid his troops, and that outrageous pair—

Bandwi and Gustaham—fled from the palace,

And hasted till they reached Khusrau Parwiz,

Who, seeing their wan looks, knew that their hearts
Contained some secret, else would they have quitted
The master of the world ? His cheeks became

Like flowers of fenugreek but he revealed

Naught to that savage pair. He bade his troops :—
“Turn from the highway for a host approacheth.
Take the long route across the unwatered plain,

And let your bodies grow inured to pain.”’

$9

How Bahrédm Chibina sent Troops after Khusrau
Parwiz and how Bandwi contrived to rescue him
from their Hands

On entering the palace of the Shah

Bahram Chubina chose from his fierce host

Six thousand wielders of the scimitar,

Mailed, to pursue the king, and put Bahram,
The son of Siyawush, in charge of those
Famed, warlike troops, while on the other part
Khusrau Parwiz took to the waste to ’scape
His foes with life, and reached at length a hold
With battlements of viewless height. Folk called it
‘* The House of God ’’—a shrine, a blesséd spot,
With bishops and a metropolitan,

Google

C. 1893
<pb n="234"/>
C. 1894

234 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

A place for penitents. He there addressed
A holy man: “ What food is there to hand ? ”
A bishop said: “ There are unleavened lozves
And watercress, my lord! If such thou needest
Let it be none save ours.”’
The king forthwith
Alighted with his escort. That aspirant
With his two courtiers took in hand for prayer
The sacred twigs, then on the soft, blue! sand
They sat and ate in haste of what there was.
Thereafter he addressed the bishop thus :
** Hast thou no wine, old sir whose steps are blest ? ”
He said: ‘* We manufacture wine from dates ;
We make it in the heat of summer-time.
There is a little left, clear as rose-water,
And red as coral in the sun.”
Forthwith
He brought a cup thereof and it eclipsed
The hue of Sol. Khusrau Parwiz drank three,
Partook of barley-bread and, when his wits
Were warmed with ruddy wine, slept with his head
Laid on Bandwi’s lap on the yielding sand,
All sorrowful of soul and liver-pierced.
Just as he slept the senior bishop came.
‘* Black dust-clouds have arisen on the road,”
He said; “ behind them is a mighty host.”
Khusrau Parwiz replied: ‘ It is bad luck
That ‘foes should seek us just as men and steeds
Are spent. The inevitable day hath comc.”’
Then spake Bandwi the good at need: *‘ Yon chief
Approacheth.”’
Said Khusrau Parwiz: ‘‘ Good friend !
Direct us in the matter.”
He rejoined :—
‘* I will devise escape for thee, O king!

1 For the sake of the rhyme, probably.

Google
<pb n="235"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 23

vi

In this strait, though I shall have sacrificed
My life to save the monarch of the world.”

Khusrau Parwiz replied: “ A sage of Chin
Hath uttered better things in this regard :—-

‘In Paradise shall be his future state
Who here hath tilled about a monarch’s gate.
The plastering can not abide in place
When city-walls are levelled to their base.
When mighty cities perish out of hand.
Let not the hospitals be left to stand.’
If shift thou knowest use it; holy God
Will save thee from the need of other help.”

Bandwi said: “‘ Let me have the crown of gold,
The earrings, girdle, and the robe from Chin,
Gold-woven and tulip-hued, and while I don them
Abide not thou. Go with thy troops apace
As sailors speed a vessel o’er the deep.”’

The youth did as Bandwi advised and thence
Companioned with the wind. When he had made
Shift thus to flee, Bandwi, the veteran,

Turned to the bishop, saying: ‘* Ye must tarry
Unseen of all upon the mountain-top,”’
Then went himself dust-swift within the shrine,
And with all speed shut fast the iron door,
Assumed the gold-embroidered robe and donned
The royal crown. He went upon the roof,
And thence unwillingly beheld a host
On every side. He waited till they came
Up to the hold to fight. At sight of him
With gold crown, earrings, torque, and belt all cried :—
It is Khusrau Parwiz with his new crown
And robes.”
Bandwi, when certain that the troops
Had taken him to be the Shah himself,
Went from the roof, donned his own clothes with
speed,

Google
<pb n="236"/>
C. 1895

236 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Then fearlessly returned and said: ‘ Young braves!
To whom shall I address me as your chief
Because I have a message from the Shah
To give in presence of the mighty men ?”
The son of Siyawush, on hcaring this,
Said: “‘I am chief and I am hight Bahram.”’
Bandwi replied: ‘“ The world-lord saith: ‘My
journey
Hath much distressed me; all our beasts are sore,
Foundered and all amort with lengthy travel.
I reached this house of penitents for rest,
But will at day-break give up worldly hopes,
And take with you the longsome road that leadeth
To great Bahram Chubina, and herein
I do not seek delay that heaven perchance
May succour me. Mine ancestors were wont
To keep the laws of honour and good faith,

_ And through their long and fortunate careers

They ne’er refused when subjects asked a boon.
So now that fortune is my foe I make
An open breast to you, for from bright Sol
To darksome dust the will of God is done.’ ”
The chief agreed and every one that heard
The Shah’s words grieved for him. The troopers all
Dismounted and kept guard on him that night.
Next day Bandwi went to the roof upon
The side that faced Bahrdm and said: “‘ The Shah
Is praying and will do naught else to-day.
He spent last night in prayer. Besides, the sun
Is high, he must not suffer from the heat.
Leave him in peace to-day. At dawn to-morrow
He shall surrender.”’
‘“* This may prove a trifle,”
Bahram said to his chiefs, “‘ or else of moment.
If we shall press him much he may be wroth
And fall on us. He is a host himself,

Google
<pb n="237"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 237

A world-aspirant, shrewd and valorous.
If he be slain in fight Bahram Chubina
Will send too dust from us. Tis best to wait
To-day, although our stores are running low,
To see if he will yield without contention.”’
Thus was it till the night rose o’er the mountains,
And her host gathered, then both far and wide
The troops spread, kindling fires on every side.

§ 10

How Bahram, the Son of Siydwush, took Bandwt and
carried him to Bahram Chibina

When earth grew sun-hued eloquent Bandwi
Went to the roof and thus addressed Bahram :—
‘* Experienced one! when dust rose from the plain
Khusrau Parwiz at sight of you departed,
He and his troops, in haste toward Rum, and now,
Wert thou to wing it eagle-like and soar
Above the sun, thou wouldst not spy the Shah
Unless in Rum where he hath aged by now ;
But if ye grant me quarter I will come
Forth to thy valiant chief and I will answer
All questions asked of me about ourselves,
But if not I will arm and send the dust
In combat to the sun.”’
The youth’s heart aged
With grief when he heard this. ‘‘ What will it profit,”
He asked his comrades, “ if I send the reek
Up from Bandwi? The better course will be
To take him as he is with mind unclouded
Before the paladin to tell whatever
He knoweth of the Shah and either lose

Google

C. 1896
<pb n="238"/>
C. 1897

238 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

His head or keep his crown.’
Then to Bandwi :—
‘* Discuss this question with Bahram Chubina,
Thou evil schemer ! ”’
Then Bandwi, the Lion,
Came down and went back with the valiant chiefs.
Bahram Chubina heard of their return,
And that Khusrau Parwiz bent on revenge
Had gone to Rum, and vehemently raged
Against the son of Siyawush, exclaiming :—
** Thou luckless miscreant ! thou hast disobeyed.
Fool that Iam! I have approved a fool! ”’
He summoned next Bandwi, the ambitious one,
And turned the wrath on him: ‘“ Thou miscreant
knave !
Blame-worthy har who hast been so foolish
As thus to gull my troops! Thou couldst not rest
Through thine ill nature and hast now become
One with accursed Khusrau Parwiz, hast made
A youth a veteran and hast come to boast :—
‘I will renew this outworn age.’ ”’
Bandwi
Replied: “‘ Exalted chief! look but for right
From me and be not fierce. Know that the king
Of kings is of my kin, his majesty
And greatness are mine own, and I have given,
As was my duty, mine own life for his.
If thou’rt a chieftain act straightforwardly.”
Bahram Chubina said: “I would not slay thee
For this thy fault. Howbeit thou wilt perish
By his hand soon and know that I speak sooth.”
They gyved Bandwi’s feet, and Bahram Chubina
Consigned him to the son of Siyawush
To keep him scathless, stayed till sunset there,
Then sought his own couch with a heart all care.”

Google
<pb n="239"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 239

§11

How Bahrdm Chibina summoned the Magnates of fran,
how they discussed his Pretensions to the Kingship,
and how he acceded to the Throne

When Sol unsheathed its sword, and when its veil
Of yellow showed, Bahram Chubina sent

And called the magnates, seating them upon
The dais of the kings on golden seats,

Which he had ranged around, and sat in Joy

As conquering monarchs do. Thereafter he
Spake with a mighty utterance thus and said :—
‘** Ye that are worshipful! now make response
In full assurance and auspiciously

Advise upon my words. Give them all heed,
And note my prompt dispatch. Ye will not find
A worse Shah than Zahhak, search as ye may,
Who slew his sire for kingship’s sake, whereby
fran fell to his hands ;! and now again

Khusrau Parwiz, a man unjust and cursed,

Hath slain his father and hath gone to Rum ;
And so till one of royal race appeareth,

One fit to claim the throne and make crown, girdle,
And fortune his who, think ye, is the man

To gird him at this present to restore

The precedents of kings ? I swear by Him,
Who is the Master of the sun on high,

That I will give you aidance in the quest.”

The nobles heard the famous chieftain’s words,
And none dissented. Then an elder rose—
Shahrén Guraz, a hoary warrior,

A chieftain eminent—and answered thus :—
‘* Thou art a benefactor to the world,

1 See Vol. i. pp. 136, 139.

Google
<pb n="240"/>
C. 1898

240 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

Illustrious prince! Hadst thou not been at Rai
No one had matched king Sawa when he reached
Our coast with forces to enslave the Free ;

But bravely thou didst arm thee and that trouble
Passed from the [rdnians, and a host equipped,
And warriors all, four hundred thousand strong,
Fled from thy wooden shaft, and thus fran
Had rest from heat and strife; so now its throne
Befitteth thee as thine unsleeping fortune

Is witness. Him that disobeyeth thee,
Or shunneth thine alliance, will we cause
To do thy will, brave though he be, and though
The matter touch Khusrau Parwiz himself.”’

Thus spake he and resumed his seat, whereat

The chieftain Khurasan stood forth before
Bahram Chubina and thus spake: “ I ask

This old, ambitious sage, who hath harangued
The assembly at such length, who hath inspired
His words ? He praised thee so that all our hearts
Rejoiced, and yet there is a goodly saying

Used in the Zandavasta by Zarduhsht
For honest brains to hear: ‘° Whoe’er shall quit
The Almighty’s way, admonish such one year,
Supplying all his needs, and after that

If he return not slay him with the sword

By order of the Shah, while if he be

The just Shah’s foeman let him be beheaded
Forthwith.’ ”’

He spake, ceased, and resumed his seat.

Then Farrukhzad stood up. “O helpful chief! ”
He said, “‘ just speech is better than mishap.

If justice then is better perish he

That joyeth in unjust words.”’

. Then he spake

Thus to Bahram Chubina: ‘ Blest be thou,

And may the sight of thee sustain the world.

Google

ee oe nee ewe ee.
<pb n="241"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 241

If these my words find favour and if God,
The Conqueror, assist us live for ever
As our blest Shah, and be the hands and tongues
Of bad men far from thee.”
That valiant man

Sat down and Khazarwan, son of Khusrau,
Came forward lion-like and said: “ Although
Both young and old talk much yet in the end,
If thou wouldst follow right, dispatch like wind
A cameleer and tarry not until
Khusrau Parwiz, the exalted one, shall tread
The longsome road a victim to injustice.
Excuse thy late behaviour and approach not
The throne thus boldly, for no general
Is worthy of it while the world-lord liveth.
If thou art fearful of Khusrau Parwiz
Break off thy love for Pars and Taisafun,
And live in ease and power in Khurasan. C. 1899
Write letter after letter of excuse ;
Perchance Khusrau Parwiz may prove amene.”’

When he withdrew stepped forward Zad Farrukh,
And said with justice: ‘“ Chiefs of noble race !
I have been listening to this debate
Of these the chosen leaders of [ran.
First, that proposal worthy of a slave
To make a paladin the Shah is one
Distasteful to the wise, one to diminish
A man’s renown. The words of Khurasan
Were grand and wedded, I maintain, to wisdom,
While those of Farrukhzad were violent,
Such as would hebetate the hearts of sages.
The fourth to speak was Khazarwan, the chief,
Whose words were also wise, for since God made
The world the course of time is manifest.
Start from Zahhak, the Arab, who was both
Unjust and foul of Faith. He slew Jamshifd,

VOL. VII. Q

Google
<pb n="242"/>
C. 1900

242 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

That overweening one, and seized the world
Unjustly. Holy men grieved that a div
Was Shah till Faridun, that glorious king,
Abated him. Next came that miscreant,
Afrasiyab, who for that purpose left
Turan and crossing o’er the stream beheaded
Naudar, the noble, with the scimitar
In piteous fashion and o’erturned the state ;
And, third, Sikandar who from Rum invaded
fran, laid waste our land, and slew Dara,
The swordsman, so that food and slumber grew
Harsh to the Iranians, while, fourthly, came
Foul Khuishnawaz who robbed our fields and fells
Of mirth and joy when unexpectedly
The Haitalians slew Piruz, a Shah high-starred,
The conqueror of the world, the chief of rulers,
And overturned the throne of king of kings.
But none hath seen a wonder such as lately
Came on [ran when Shah Khusrau Parwiz
Fled from the throne, from his own troops, to
foes !””

This said, he sat and wept. Bahram Chubina
Turned livid at the words. The veteran
Sambaz, loin-girt, with Indian sword in hand,
Leapt to his feet. ‘‘ This noble paladin,”’

He said, “‘is great, just, ardent, so till one
Of royal race shall come and gird his loins
Tis best for him to sit upon the throne,
For he is warlike, brave, and fortunate.”’

Bahram Chubina, chief of warriors,

Heard, clapped his hand upon his sword and drew it,
Exclaiming: ‘“‘ If we find within this quarter

A woman of the lineage of the Shahs

I will behead her with the trenchant sword,

And let the breath of death pass over her.

+ Couplet inserted from P.

Google

<pb n="243"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 243

I will not wait for one to claim the realm,
And caracole amidst the cavaliers.”’
Whenas the chiefs possessed by Ahriman!
Heard their foul leader thus assert himself
They drew their scimitars, arose, and spake
In terms unheard till then: ‘‘ Bahram Chubina
Is Shéh and we are subjects. We will not
Transgress his wishes and commands.”
Now when
Bahram Chubina saw the scimitars
Drawn he did what was just and right, and said :—
** Tf any one shall leave his seat and touch
His scimitar I will cut off his hand
Forthwith and sober him.”’
This said, he left
The nobles for the pleasance. That great conclave
Dispersed with faces lined and broken hearts.
Whenas the pitch-hued, star-illumined Veil
Appeared, and watchmen’s calls were heard, he asked
For pen and paper, and a noble scribe,
And wise, approached, to whom he handed pen
And inkstand, saying: “‘ Write out on this silk
This declaration from the Iranians :—?
* Bahram Chubina is the Shah, triumphant,
Deserving crown, adorning throne, and seeking
Right publicly and privily.’ ”’
This written
They lighted links and passed an anxious night,
But when the Veil of lapis-lazuli
Had passed away and when the world was sun-gilt,
One fortune-favoured came and set a state
Within the palace of Bahram Chubina ;
Upon that golden state they placed a seat,
And oped the court. He took his place as Shah,

' Reading with P.
* Thus imitating the impious Zahhak. See Vol. i. p. 154.

Google
<pb n="244"/>
C. 1901

244 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And donned the royal crown. The scribe then brought
The declaration of his sovereignty
Inscribed upon the costly painted silk,
And each chief testified: ‘“‘ Bahram Chibina
Is monarch of the world.”
When they had signed
He sealed it with his golden seal and said :—
** All-holy God will testify to you
That now this realm is mine and may its kings
Be of my lineage for a thousand years,
And thus ennobled hold in line direct
The crown and lofty throne.”
"Twas on the day
Khurshfd of month Azar that thus the Lion
Gave up the Onager’s back.!_ Bahram Chubina
Thereafter thus harangued the [ranians :—
‘* Revengeful strife hath risen in our midst.
Whoe’er accepteth not this settlement,
Be he an honest man or not, shall spend
But three days in Iran and on the fourth,
What time the world’s Light mounteth to the sky,
Shall go to join Khusrau Parwiz and sleep not
In our dominions longer.”’
Blessing him,
Not from their hearts, men said: ‘ May earth ne’er
lack thee.”
Heart-broken that Bahram Chubina reigned
Those loyal to the kingdom’s rightful lord
Departed Rum-ward and dispersed abroad.

* Moh! has “ lorsque le lion dévore Je dos de l’onagre.”’ It may
mean ‘‘ When the country (the onager) lost its natural tyrant the
lion (Khusrau Parwiz) by the accession of Bahram Chubina.”’

Google
<pb n="245"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 245

§ 12

How Bandwui plotted with Bahram, the Son of Siydwush,
to slay Bahrédm Chiubina, and how Bandui fled from
Bond

For seventy days Bandwi, like cheetah bound,
Was in the prison of Bahram Chubina,
‘Watched by Bahram, the son of Siyawush—
A most unwilling jailor—whom Bandwi,
Still scheming though in bondage, thus beguiled :—
‘Despair not of the monarch of fran ;
Though night be dark ’twill turn to day and though
His fortune, like the fortune of Pirtz
With Khushnawaz, shall tarry long. The Maker
Restored him in the person of Kubdad,}
And gave him back the world. Bahram Chubina
In like wise will retain not crown and throne.
Doth he himself, this man of fortune, think it ?
Nay, perish any rustic who thus giveth
Himself in folly to the wind. Count thou
Two months upon thy fingers and thou'lt see
Troops from [ran in Rum, and they will cast
Fire on this crown and throne, and break the jewels
On this man’s head.”’

Bahram said: “If the king
Will grant me quarter I will deck my soul
With thine advice and do thy will in all,
But I must have a great oath sworn to me
By moon, Azargashasp, by throne and crown,
That if Khusrau Parwiz come to our coasts,
And bring a host from Cesar and from Rum,
Thou wilt ask him to spare my life, not slight
What so importeth me, lest he be led

1 Kaikubad in the original.

Google

C. 1902
<pb n="246"/>
246 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

By what the Iranians say and harm befall me.”
He spake, then calling for the Zandavasta
He caused Bandwi to swear, who took the roll,
And said: ‘‘ Let not Bandwi see aught but pain
And toil from the Supreme or e’er find rest
Within this Wayside Hostelry if I
Do otherwise. Else when Khusrau Parwiz
Bestir himself I will not look on him,
Or ever rest, unless he send to thee
Withal a signet and a chieftain’s crown.”
Bahram, on hearing what an oath he swore,
And seeing his pure heart and loyalty,
Said: ‘I will tell thee all my schemes aloud.
I will achieve revenge and set a snare
To catch Bahram Chubina. Where I set it
There will I do mine utmost to destroy him
With bane of scimitar. Our streams are dry
Since we have had to hail him as the Shah.”
Bandwi replied: ** Know, O experienced man !
That I am shrewd and prompt and wise, and when
Khusrau Parwiz returneth with a host
From Rum, and sitteth on the state, thou’lt find
That he will not refuse me anything.
I will ask pardon for thy past offence,
And he would give his crown at my request.
If thou wilt keep thy word and not ensue
Guile in thy heart unfetter me and thus
Begin to recognise Khusrau Parwiz ;
‘Twill prove thy secret bent; that plain appeal
Will reach his ear.”’
Thereat Bahram’s face brightened,
And he removed the fetters.
When night’s veil,
Musk-hued, turned bright and dawn laid hand thereon
Bahram said to Bandwi: “ If my heart fail not,
What time Bahram Chubina playeth polo

Google
<pb n="247"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 247

To-day I have engaged me with five friends
To slay him.”
Calling for a coat of mail
He donned it ’neath his dress and rode away.
Bahram, the warrior, had a wicked wife
Who wished him hewn to pieces. In her heart
She was enamoured of Bahram Chubina,
While hatred of her husband filled her soul ;
So to Bahram Chubina she dispatched
Some one to say: “ O thou that succourest !
Protect thyself because Bahram hath donned
His mail beneath his robe and buckled it.
I know not what may be his ill intent,
But thou hadst better keep aloof from him.”
Bahram Chubina, hearing her advice
Not to play polo with her spouse, tapped all
Who came upon the ground with polo-sticks,
And drew anear him, gently on the back
With kindly greetings in a pleasant tone
Until he reached the son of Siyawush,
Found him to be in mail and said: “ O thou
Worse than a biting snake! who weareth mail
Beneath his silk upon the polo-ground ?”’ .
This said, he drew his vengeful scimitar,
And clave the son of Siyawush in two.
"Twas bruited in the city that Bahram
Was slain, and when the tidings reached Bandwi
The daylight failed him. Putting on his mail
He mounted, quaking girt his warlike loins,
And taking all the kinsmen of Bahram,
With all that looked for safety to himself,
Fled from the city and the Day of Doom.
When they had gone one stage their numbers grew ;
They pressed along the road to Ardabil.
Bahram Chubina, when he left the ground,
Trailed in his wrath his robe in blood, then ordered

Go gle

C. 1903
<pb n="248"/>
248 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

Mahrwi to guard Bandwi. The people said :—
“Fret not for him, O king! for when he heard
News of this slaying verily he took
The wind for waymate, knowing that the matter
Concerned himself and that Bahram was slain
For their intrigue. He sorrowed to have caused
His comrade’s death and saw the outlook dark.”
The king said: ‘‘ May he lack both skin and brain
That knoweth not foe from friend. One will repose
Upon the points of elephants’ tusks, another
Trust to the billows of the dark blue sea;
A third will brave a monarch’s wrath, a fourth
Take lion by the foreleg. Let thy soul
Feel for all four; their fortune is averse.
Another would move mountains and inviteth
All to his aid. He wearieth himself,
And as the outcome clutcheth but the wind.
To voyage in a ship unseaworthy
Is better than to be precipitate,
And if thou seekest and dost find a spring
Wilt thou grow daft and turn therefrom in wrath ?
The man whose guide is blind will tarry long
Cc. 1904 Upon his way. The handler of a dragon
Would die, the dragon ’scape, while pain and death
Are his who eateth bane for trial’s sake,
And yet I did not slay Bandwi at first,
So he hath schemed and hath escaped my hands !
My act is one for which I needs must weep,
And see what is God’s will.”
Bandwi the while
With his small band sped on like rushing wind.
Each carried with him what he could toward where
Mausil, the Armenian, dwelt along a road
Infested by wild beasts and waterless.

1 The import of the speech is: ‘ There are many sorts of fools
but Iam the greatest of them all.”

Google
<pb n="249"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 249

Bandwi perceived a camp-enclosure pitched,
Saw that it was Mausil’s, found streams and food,
And hurried forward to that fertile spot
Alone, beheld Mausil, did him obeisance,
And told him privily the case, who said :—
‘* Stay here, for here the latest news will reach thee
Of what Khusrau Parwiz doth in fair Rum,
And if he contemplateth peace or war.”’
Thereat Bandwi was minded to remain,
And called up his companions from the plain.

§ 13
How Khusrau Parwiz went toward Rim by the Desert-

route and how a Hermit told him of the Past and
Future

Khusrau Parwiz led on in haste where guide,
And grass and water, were not. Slack of rein
They went in dudgeon till they reached Babil,
Where all the well-disposed among the chiefs
Went forth to welcome him. As he drew near
He made his men dismount outside the city,
And scarce had done so when a courier came
Out of frin in haste. He bore a letter
Concealed upon him from Bahram Chiubina,
And written to the ruler of Babil :—

‘Detain a company if one shall come ;

My troops pursue and will arrive anon.”’

The ruler, seeing the letter’s purport, sought
Khusrau Parwiz in haste, who looked and read,
Astounded at the process of the world.

He feared pursuit and mourned his own fatigue,
But mounting presently departed thence,
And girding up his royal loins pressed on

Google |

C
fe

1905
<pb n="250"/>
250 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI ‘

Until he came to the Farat;: no rest
Saw he in his own realm. His followers,
Both old and young, were famished. Then they spied
A wood and water while a caravan
Of camels led on by a cameleer
Appeared anon. That youth, when he beheld
Khusrau Parwiz, called blessings down upon |
That noble one, who asked: ‘‘ What is thy name ?
What is thy trade and whither goest thou ?”’
He answered: ‘‘ Kais am I, son of Haris,
And heir of Arab chiefs. From Misr have I
Come with a caravan and am myself
Chief cameleer. I dwell beside the waters
Of the Farat and came thence to this forest.”
Khusrau Parwiz asked: ‘* What hast thou of food
And stuffs, for we are wearied out and famished,
Not having food or packs ? ”
The Arab said :—
** Stay ; I am one with thee, share, soul, and body.”
In his affection for the Shah he brought
A fatted cow; they slaughtered her and lit
A fire by kindling sticks both green and dry.
He grilled kabab ; the comrades of the Shah
Were eager to partake, consuming much,
But had no bread. Each chieftain then made ready
A sleeping-place. They slept awhile, then rose
And offered up their orisons anew
To that just Judge who made the world, made mighty
And weak alike, and then the Shah addressed
His comrades thus: “ The most in fault are they
That are my noblest and most famous subjects :
Still those that have done worst, rebelled, and left
God’s way, may trust with confidence to me.
See that ye give to them the fairest hopes.”
His comrades blessed him, saying: ‘‘O thou pure
Of heart and Faith! bright be thy heart and jocund |

Google
<pb n="251"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 251

Thy lot, and may the just Judge give thee back
The throne. He hath bestowed on thee such Grace
And mien that love and justice are increased
For every one: thou art the sum of wisdom,
For thou replacest ill by good.”
The Shah,

Though pleased at this acclaim, was in his heart
Concerned about his route and asked the Arab :—
** What is it like ? How shall I fare with troops ? ”’

He answered: “ Seventy farsangs and more
Of waste and mountain front you. With thy leave
I will find meat and water for the road
If thou wilt hurry not.”

. Khusrau Parwiz
Replied: “ There is no other course, for this
Will furnish provand and a guide.”
The Arab

Dispatched a cameleer to fare before
The troops. He hurried over waste and mountain,
All care and travail, with that company.
Withal afar another caravan
Appeared upon the route before the troops.
A wealthy merchant sought the king, who asked :—
‘* Say, whence art thou and whither hastening ? ”

He said: ‘‘ I am a merchant and a scribe,
And I have come from Khurra-i-Ardshir.”’

‘** How did thy father name thee ? ”’ said the Shah.
The merchantman replied: ‘‘ Mihran Sitad.”’

The king requested of the man supplies
Because the leader of his troops had said :—
‘“* He hath, O Shah! provisions past compute,
But may not be best pleased.”

“ To find a host

Upon the way is so much to the good,”
The Shah replied. The merchant loosed his bales
Of cheap and costly wares, brought provand forth,

Google

C. 1906
<pb n="252"/>
C. 1907

252 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And sat himself upon the ground, invoking

A blessing on the king. The eating done,

The hospitable merchant brought the Shah

The water for his hands, but when Kharrad,
Son of Barzin, saw that he rose, ran up,

Took the warm water from the merchant’s hand,
That no respect toward the Shah might fail,
And when the merchantman made haste to bring
Wine lucent as rose-water then again

Kharrad, son of Barzin, took from his hand

The goblet and presented it himself.

In due observance servants profit find,

For all such service is repaid in kind.

‘* Which is the army’s route,”’ the Shah then asked

The merchant, “‘ and, O hospitable man !
Where dwellest thou in Khurra-i-Ardshir ? ”’
He said: *“‘O Shah! live in prosperity.

I of these traffickers am from Karaz.”!

The Shah enjoined Ruzbih, the scribe, to note
The young man’s name and village. ‘“ Go thy ways,
And be at heart the warp and woof of wisdom,”

He said. The army left that verdant spot,

And hurrying toward the Ruman marches reached

The town which Cesar named Karsan. The Christ-
lans,

On seeing the troops afar, went hurrying

Across the waste to carry their effects

Within the walls and firmly barred the gates.

The Shah, the lustre of the world, chagrined

Remained outside for three days with his troops,

And on the fourth dispatched a man to say :—

‘‘Our troops are few, send provand, succour us,

And treat us not in this high-handed wise.”’

They scorned his words, his troops were weak and

famished,

1‘ Je suis le courticr des marchands.’> Mohl.

Google
<pb n="253"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 253

When suddenly there rose a murky cloud,

Which roared like some great warrior-lion ; a storm
Swept o’er the place; from every quarter came
Din and acry for help. By midnight half

The walls had gone; the town was all amaze ;
The bishop offered prayers ; in every quarter
They gathered food together, and three priests,
Three venerable men, went forth in haste

With native produce and with Ruman robes,

And brought a led horse to the Shah. They said :—
‘Our fault, O Shah! is manifest to us,”’

And he, a noble youth, reproached them not.

There was within the city’s walls a palace,
Whose summit was at home among the clouds ;
"Twas built by Cesar and had many slaves.

The Shah went thither when he left the plain,
And oft-times used to go about the city.
The Rimans all acclaimed him and strewed jewels
Beneath his feet. Possessed of this fair dwelling
He rested for a while and wrote to Cesar
Of that storm, rain, and darksome cloud, then went
Toward Manwi which he renamed Mint.
The shrewd and wise, the great and powerful,
Among its citizens, with priests and monks,
Went to the king with gifts and offerings,
Spake of the storm and of that ancient town,”
And all said: “‘ We are slaves and bow before
Khusrau Parwiz’ behest.”

He stayed three days,
And on the fourth when Sol, the world’s light, rese,
And thrust its bright sword through the clouds,

departed

Toward Warigh ;? it was a city’s name,
And had the true Cross‘ and a hospital.

1 4.e. Paradise. > Karsan.
* Spelt also Aurfgh. ‘ Cf. Vol. v. p. 306 and note.

Google
<pb n="254"/>
C. 1908

254 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Upon the waste he saw a hermitage ;
He heard the hermit’s voice, approached, and asked :—
** What blesséd one is here ? ”’

They made reply :—
** An ancient man grown wan with many years,
A skilled astrologer ; there is not aught
Concealed from him, and what he saith will be.”’

The Shah drew nigh the door forthwith and cried :—
‘* Be thine to worship God, and may He bless thee
If thou wilt come forth from thine ancient cell.”

Forthwith the hermit, when he heard the words,
Descended from his cell and seeing the Shah
Said: ‘‘ Of a truth thou art Khusrau Parwiz
Brought by the hand of an ill-doing slave,

Impure, Armenian-like, a servitor,
To this affliction for thy father’s throne.”’

He spake at large; Khusrau Parwiz became
Cheered in his heart through all that kindliness,
And all in wonder at the words invoked
The blessings of the Maker on the man,

The devotee, and, mounted, greeted him
With outstretched hand, whereat the man of God
Did reverence and spake long. By way of proof
The Shah said: ‘ Of the franian host am I,
A subject, bearing a dispatch to Cesar,
And I shall carry to my lord his answer.
See if my journey will be prosperous,
And how result.”’
He answered : “ Say not so ;

Thou art the Shah, make not thyself a courtier.
I told thee all at sight so never prove me.
Thy Faith alloweth no falsehood, and deceit
Is not thy way and wont. Thou hast endured
Much toil and suffered, and at last hast fled
Before thy slave.”

Astounded and confused

Google

. a
Fe
<pb n="255"/>
KHUSRAU PARUW1IZ 25

orl

Khusrau Parwiz began to make excuse.
The hermit said: ‘* Forbear, and question me
Of what will be. As to thy coming hither
Be glad and confident, and to the world
A fruitful bough for God will satisfy thee,
And give to thee high fortune and high place,
While thou wilt have from Cesar arms and troops,
And daughter worthy of the crown of state.
The World-lord, who ne’er sleepeth, will assist thee
In battle with thy slaves, while in the end
The miscreant will flee and oft recall
The days of his success. He will alight
Far from that field of battle and there dwell ;
Yet still, though rather than submit to thee
He will choose exile, they will shed his blood
At thy behest.” .
Khusrau Parwiz replied :—
‘God grant it, ancient sage! but tell me this:
Will it be long ere I obtain the kingship ? ”
He said: ‘“* Twelve months and thou wilt have the
throne,
Then fifteen days and thou wilt light the world
As king of kings.”’
‘** Who of this company,”
The Shah inquired, ‘“ will bear most toil and care
On mine account ? ”
The hermit said: ‘* Bistam,}!
A lofty spirit and a prosperous,
And thy maternal uncle who, thou knowest,
Hath made thy lifetime pleasant ; but be ware
Of that unprofitable man, the source
Of all thy plaints, affliction, and mishap.”
The Shah was wrcth and said to Gustaham :—
‘Thy name revealeth thee! Thy mother called thee

1 The Arabic form of Gustaham. He was no true Persian
and therefore not to be trusted.

Google

C. 1909
<pb n="256"/>
C. I19Io

256 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Bistam but thou proclaimest in the fight
Thyself a Gustaham ! ”
Then to the hermit :—
‘“* This is mine uncle on my mother’s side.”
The hermit answered: ‘ Yea, it is the same;
Thou wilt see pain and strife through Gustaham.”’
** And after,’’ said the Shah, ‘‘ what will ensue,
My counsellor ? ”’
He answered: ‘“‘ Heed not that,
For thenceforth thou wilt have but praise ; no ill
E’er will befall thee, and if hardship cometh
"Twill be from God. This rebel will disturb
Thy peace, but after thou wilt be content,
And, bad as this malicious one may prove,
His fate is in thy hands.”
‘“* Be not concerned
Hereat, O king!” said Gustaham. ‘“ By God,
The Holy One, the Maker of the moon,
Who made a Shah like thee to rule the world ;
By sun, by moon, and by Azargashasp,
And by the life and head of our famed Shah,
While Gustaham shall live he shall not seek
Aught but the right or knock at evil’s door ;
And if he should be minded otherwise
Then may the soul of Gustaham depart.
No human being since the World-lord made
The world hath looked upon His secret’s key ;

Why shouldst thou credit then a Christian’s words,

And heed his idle talk ? Suspect me not

Through speech of his, and seek not for a pretext

Against me now that I have sworn to thee.”
Khusrau Parwiz made answer: ‘ Holy men

Speak to the point. Withal I have not seen

Ill from thee ever, and thou catchest not

At guile or folly, yet high heaven’s process

May make thee harmful and no wonder too,

Google

ee Pe oP me
<pb n="257"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 257

For when God willeth wit and wisdom swerve.”
Then said he to the hermit: ‘“ Be thou glad
In heart and prosperous.”
From that hermitage
He went like levin flashing from a cloud
Toward the city of Warigh, and thence
There met him those of worth and eminence.

§ 14

How a Cavalier of Caesar came to Khusrau Parwiz
and how Khusrau Parwiz sent a Letter by Gusta-
ham, Badlwt, Andiydn, Kharrdd, Son of Barzin,
and Shdpiur to Cesar

When he arrived'there came from noble Ceesar
A cavalier to say: ‘‘ Ask what thou wilt
Within our coasts and see that thou refrain not
Thy will from kings, for though this realm is mine
I hold thee as mine equal. Stay secure,
And happy in yon city, apprehending
No ill. All Ruamans, haughty though they are
And chiefs, shall serve thee, and I will not seek
Food, sleep or rest till I have furnished thee
With arms and troops.”
The Shah heard and rejoiced ;

His soul was eased ; he bade call Gustaham,
Balwi, aspiring Andiyan, Kharrad,
Son of Barzin, and lion Shapur, and thus
Spake that brave monarch: “ Saddle up at dawn
With golden saddles on the horses led,
Put on your tunics gold-inwoven from Chin,
Be one in heart and honesty, depart,
And parle with Cesar. Be ye wary, shrewd,

VOL. VIII. R

Google
<pb n="258"/>
C. 1gt!

258 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!

Attentive, bland, and courteous. If he goeth
Upon the Ground for archery or polo
Exert you to the utmost ’gainst his chiefs,
For ye must not be worsted: let him know
That horsemanship proceedeth from Iran,
While from its Lions there come might and valour.”’
The Shah then bade Kharrad, son of Barzin :—
** Bring hither silk from Chin and black musk; I
Must write a letter like resplendent Sol
In jocund Paradise to Cesar, brief
But to the purpose, such as all men’s hearts
May recollect. He hath philosophers ;
Be instant that they hear no foolishness.
They measure not their words in anything ;
Let them not find a fault in our dispatch.
When he hath read the letter loose thy tongue ;
None of them can compete with thee in speech.”’
Then to Balwi :! “ If Cesar speak of us
In public with regard to an alliance,
Oath, treaty or affinity, reply
As sweet as honey for thou art my tongue
Before that folk and mine interpreter
For good and ill. Endeavour by all means
To save us from defeat ; be diligent ;
Take mine assurances and bear in mind
My words.”’
Those ardent, veteran warriors
Heard the instructions of that glorious youth,
And blessed him saying: “ May none wear the crown
But thou.”
They fared with cheerful hearts to Cesar,
Who when he heard: ‘‘ Some nobles of fran,
The envoys of the monarch of the world,
Have reached Yunan,”’ sent many troops to meet
them.
1 Reading with P. and below.

Google
<pb n="259"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 259

He decked a palace with brocade of Rum,
The pattern jewelled on a ground of gold,
And sitting on the famous ivory throne
Assumed the heart-illuming crown and bade
Withdraw the curtain and to introduce
The envoys from the vestibule, rejoicing.
First came the noble Gustaham, behind
There were Balwi and brave Shapur, Kharrad,
Son of Barzin, and valiant Andiyan,
All crowned and girdle-girt. They came anear
To Cesar and on seeing did obeisance,
With one consent called blessings down on him,
And on that golden throne besprinkled gems.
He first inquired about the Shah, fran,
The host and toilsome journey. Hearing this,
Kharrad, son of Barzin, approached the throne,
And brought the letter of the Shah. They set,
By order of that noble sovereign,
Four golden seats, and of the envoys three,
Men of illustrious rank and well advised,
Sat down, but still Kharrad, son of Barzin,
Stood. Cesar said: “A traveller should sit.”
‘** The Shah hath not conferred on me the right,”’
He answered, “in thy presence while I hold
His letter: mine abasement may commend
Itself to thee and aid mine embassage.”’
Said Cesar: “Speak. What said the prudent
prince ? ”
Kharrad, son of Barzin, what while he spake
Observing what Khusrau Parwiz had said,
First praised the Maker and besought His help,
‘** Who is above all height, all wise, all mighty,
Who hath revealed heaven’s host and given us
Soul, wisdom, love. He bade and heaven was,
For He is over space and time. The sphcre
And stars revolving are His work. When He

Google

C. 1912
<pb n="260"/>
260 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Created servants out of worthless dust
He gave life first to Gaiumart.1 The race
Went on to Farfdun whom God most favoured
Of all those noble chieftains. Once obscure
His stock became illustrious in the world,
And lasted up to Kai Kubad who donned
The crown of majesty. His race ne’er saw
Calamity and ever kept God’s way ;
But now a worthless slave hath come and sat
Upon the royal throne. I seek for justice
Against the unjust, not crown, throne, cap, and

girdle.
Whoever sitteth on a throne hath need
Of wisdom, fortune, and nobility.
This man shall learn to whom the fortune, Grace,
And diadem of king of kings pertain.
Help me and quell this traitor for I roam
Despised by small and great.”

° When Cesar heard

His cheeks became like bloom of fenugreck ;
That bloom of fenugreek grew charged with hail,
And from his tongue and soul there burst a wail.”

§ 15
How Cesar answered the Letter of Khusrau Parwiz

He read, his grief increased, the throne appeared
All mournful? to his eyes, and thus that world-lord
Said to Kharrad, son of Barzin: ‘“ That I

Esteem Khusrau Parwiz above myself,

Above my kindred and my fluent soul,

Is not a secret with discerning men.

1 See Vol. i. p. 117 seq. * Like lapis-lazuli in the original.

Google
<pb n="261"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 261

I have arms, troops, and treasure. Now consider
What ye require. If he will have mine eyes
I will not say him nay though they are better
Than wealth, dinars, and sword.”
Then Cesar summoned
A well-experienced scribe and, seating him
Upon the royal dais, bade him write
An answer decked like meads of Paradise
With many a counsel, promise, and kind word
About past times and present. When the scribe
Had finished Cesar chose a cavalier
Brave, fluent, ardent, and of heedful mind,
Wise, learned, a warrior, and scribe withal,
And said: “ Go to Khusrau Parwiz and say :—
‘Thou seeker of God’s way, shrewd-hearted Shah !
I have men, arms, and treasure, and no need
To trouble any one but, if need were,
Would requisition drachms from every lord
Throughout the realm that thou mightst have thy
wish,

And go hence to thine own home in fran.
Grieve not while here, ’tis circling heaven’s way,
Which is by turns our refuge and our bale,
By turns our loss and profit. While I find
Arms, troops, and money do thou take thine ease.’ ”’

The envoy went and told Khusrau Parwiz.

§ 16

How Cesar wrote to Khusrau Parwiz, declining to
help him, and his Answer

Then Cesar cleared the audience-room and sat
Deliberating with his counsellor,
And said thus to that priest: ‘‘ This suppliant

Google

C. 1913
<pb n="262"/>
262 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Hath made choice of ourselves to refuge with :
What shall we do that he may gather strength,
And feel no more his subject’s insolence ? ”’
The counsellor thus answered: ‘‘ What we need

Is that a few shrewd-hearted men of those
That are our well-advised philosophers
Shall act with us herein.”

So famous Cesar
Dispatched a messenger and four arrived
Of those philosophers, two young, two old,
All Ruman-born, and thus they spake at large :—
‘‘The Iranians, since Sikandar passed away,
Have deeply wounded us by frequent raiding,
By war and strife, and causeless, reckless bloodshed ;
Now holy God requiteth their ill deeds
In kind. Since the Saésanians’ fortune halteth
Forbear to intervene. Khusrau Parwiz,
If he shall gain the royal crown and raise

C. 1914 His forehead to the moon, will ask for tribute
From Rum anon and trample on our land.
Reflect if this be wise. Hold their words wind.”’
When Cesar heard he changed his mind and sent

The Shah a letter by a cavalier
To tell what course the sages had advised
In long debate. He reached Khusrau Parwiz,
And told what he had heard the famed king say,
Delivered Ceesar’s letter too and uttered
Words past compute. Khusrau Parwiz grew strait
Of heart thereat, his face turned wan with care.
He thus replied: ‘‘ If we must lay to heart
All that can be alleged from days of yore
Then all our travail will but catch the wind.
Consider now if my progenitors,
Those chosen world-lords, men of holiness,
Made wars with justice or unjustly ; ask
Of ancient men who bear such things in mind.

Google
<pb n="263"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 263

Vouchsafe to question the wise men of Rum
If *twas the crow or owl that did the wrong.}
Although the Maker hath not left in want
The Great of Rim mine ancestors withal
Were men of name, in their own days supreme,
Who were no brookers of insurgency,
Pride, wrong, or foolishness from any one ;
But what can this avail now that my head
Is in the dragon’s maw ? Greet Cesar for me,
And say: ‘ The Great speak only to the point
In wisdom’s presence though both good and ill
Pass in the end. I will not rest till I
Have drawn my skirt forth from this turbid stream,
And if the Rumans will not succour me
I will send envoys to the Khan. My words
Have naught availed because my river-bed
Was fouled, and when my messengers return
My sojourn in this city will be short.’ ”’

He said to the Iranians: ‘ Obey
My hests; let not this matter break your hearts,
For God, the Conqueror, is aiding us ;
Our part is fortitude and manliness.”

He took the matter lightly and dispatched
His answer by Tukhar. He wrote as though
He recked not either good or ill. Tukhar
Departed from Khusrau Parwiz and came
To where was Cesar’s court, that man of name.

» Alluding to a story in the book of Kalfla and Dimna (see Vol.
vii., p. 382). The owls, having an ancient grudge against the crows,
one of whom had prevented the owl from being elected the king of
the cranes, made a treacherous night-attack upon the crows. A
counsellor of the king of the crows, acting somewhat as an Haitalian
chief is said to have done in the war against Piruz (id. p. 161),
succeeded in avenging them.

Google
<pb n="264"/>
264 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

§17

How Cesar wrote the second Time to Khusrau Parwiz
about giving him Ard

C. 1915 Now Cesar having read the letter pondered,
And then addressed his noble minister :—
‘“Expound these problems. Call the Great and

Brave,

Tell what hath passed at large and ascertain
If now Khusrau Parwiz in this contention
Will be successful or will writhe at fortune.
If ye shall say: ‘ He will not be victorious,
Henceforth there is no New Year’s Day for him,’
Then will we let him journey to the Khan,
And go, since he is ailing, to that cure ;
But if he is to triumph and possess
The kingship, like his father, it were well
In all ways that he go hence with a host,
And so not contemplate revenge at heart.”

The prudent minister, on hearing this,
Gave orders and the readers of the stars
Came with their ancient tablets and consulted
Until three watches of the night had passed,
And in conclusion an astrologer
Spake thus to Cesar: “O illustrious !
I have consulted these old tables made
In astrologic wise by Falatun.1
Ere long Khusrau Parwiz will have the realm,
The kingship start afresh, and darksome dust
Receive him not for eight and thirty years.”’

Thereat said Cesar to his minister :—
** Our doubts are cleared about Khusrau Parwiz.
What shall we say ? What answer shall we give ? ”’

1 Plato.

Go gle
<pb n="265"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 265

‘* Let us apply a salve,”’ he made reply.
‘** If he betake him to the Khan’s domains,
Get aid from him, perceive himself secure,
And levy soldiers elsewhere than in Rum,
He never will forgo revenge on thee.
Advise thou who art wiser and more potent
In compassing thy will.”
‘* We must,” said Cesar,
‘* Dispatch him troops forthwith. When all is
weighed
Tis well to hold wealth cheap and keep from harm.”’
He wrote forthwith, bestowing praise on praise :—
‘** We have consulted loyal, honest priests
On all points bad and good, and have returned,
Discussion over, to our former view.
All is arranged and now we will unlock
Our ancient hoards. Within Kastantaniya!
We have but force enough for garrison,
But have ta’en order and have requisitioned
Troops from the other provinces. As these
Arrive I will not fail to send them to thee.
All this delay and great deliberation.
This pricking with a fleam the lion’s jaws,
Arose from sages’ tales about the past,
How under Shah Shapur, son of Ardshir,
Our youths’ hearts aged with toil, much ravaging,
Assault and slaughter and unjust revenge ;
Then passing to Kubad? and to Hurmuzd,
Both reckless of God’s justice, of our cities
Were nine and thirty turned to bramble-brakes
By the frdnians, and the waste became
Filled with the blood of chiefs whose wives and children
Were carried captive ; so thou must not marvel
If Rumans mused revenge. Howbeit to owe
A grudge is not according to our Faith,

* Constantinople. * Kaikubad in the original.

Google

C. 1916
<pb n="266"/>
266 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

And God forbid that we should practise ill.
We know no better thing than uprightness,
And lack of all deceit and knavery.
We have convoked the chiefest sufferers,
And spoken much to them in this regard ;
Their evil passions have been charmed away,
For gnawing bane hath turned to antidote.
Thus then have we secured that none will use
The language of revenge about the past,
And pledge our lives to further thy commands.
Thou too must pledge thy word that none will bear
Ill will to us, must say: ‘ While I am king
I will not think your labours slight or mean,
Will not demand a tribute from the Rumans,
Or sell for aught these services of theirs.’
Go further in complaisance : treat and make
Affinity with us. Whate’er ye do,
E’en in an unjust war, let us be friends
And brothers still through all vicissitudes
Of power. Now when ye need our help no longer,
And thoughts of vengeance shall recur to you,
There will be talk again of Tur and Salm,
And of the follies of the past, so now
I ask a binding pact, fit for thy seal,
As a reminder that from this time forth
We will not speak of vengeance for Iraj,
Or of the past. Iran and Rum shall be
One realm; we will not seek to sever them.

C. 1917 There is a daughter in our ladies’ bower—
A fit match for the greatest of the great ;
Ask her according to our holy Faith,
According to our rites and ritual,
That when thou hast a child of Cesar’s line
He may not think of vengeance for Iraj :
Then earth will rest from war and strife, and seek
The right way in the Faith. Regarding this

Google
<pb n="267"/>
KHUSRAU PARWI!IZ 267

With wisdom’s eye thou wilt esteem it just.
Affinity will make alliance sure,
Such is the precept that we have of God.
Good sooth, it is a long day since Piruz,
Or Khishnawaz.! They gave their heads to wind,
But perish any treaty-breaking king !
Our Prophet, the Messiah, said thus: ‘ If thou
Quit justice wisdom warpeth.’ Many a plan
Tried Khushnawaz to keep the other’s head
From coming to the shears, but when Piriz
Used force against him, in that fight the Shah
Saw but black reek while host and royal throne
Went to the winds because his head was turned
From right. Thou art a youth new to affairs,
And if thou wouldest gather fortune’s fruit
Make not a treaty-breaker thine ally ;
Dust is the shroud of such, and crown and throne
Curse treaty-breaking, strife-provoking kings.
Peruse my letter o’er and, if thy fingers
Possess the needful skill, write heedfully
A fair and good response. I would not have
This known to any scribe, so write thyself,
And take good heed. When I shall read thine
answer,
And see therein the heart of one resolved,
I will dispatch forthwith arms, troops, and money
To ease thy heart of care. As touching those
Who are with thee most honoured or renowned,
And those withal ’gainst whom thou _ harbourest
vengeance,”
Put manfully such hatred from your hearts.
Leave their? ill doings to almighty God,
2 With a slight change of reading. Mohl translates: ‘ Depiis
Pirouz jusqu’a Khouschnewaz, il s’est passé bien du temps, pendant
lequel les deux peuples ont livré leurs tétes au vent.”’

* Or“ And him withal,” eéc., referring to Bahram Chubina.
* Or “ his.”

Google
<pb n="268"/>
C. 1918

268 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And be not masterful with friend or foe.
If thou wouldst have victorious fortune hold thee
Lord of the world with host and crown and throne,
Lay not thy hand on others’ goods but make
Thy soul a pathway toward the light, indulge
Thy kindred, and protect the labouring poor.
If thou art bounteous and a friend in need
None will attempt thy crown and throne. Of Shahs
The vigilant have kept the world from foes.
The magnates that desire affinity
Themselves or for their virtuous children ne’er
Have suffered ill from foemen, and God’s Grace
Hath magnified them.1_ Now we all court thee,
And deck our tongues to give thee good advice.”’
Whenas the address was dry they sealed the letter

With musk. Now when with tidings of a league
That he expected not the letter reached
Khusrau Parwiz he told the franians :—
‘The sun revolveth otherwise to-day !
A letter of high policy hath come
From Cesar in most favourable terms :
He seeketh to abate the ancient feud .
Between [ran and Rim.”

They answered him :—
‘**'Whene’er this feud is o’er no chiefs will seek
The Shéh’s crown, or such numbers live in want.
If in thy days such righteousness come down
Men will inscribe thy name on every crown.”

1 Couplets transposed.

Google
<pb n="269"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 269

$18

How Khusrau Parwitz answered Cesar about the
Alliance

Now when they had approved this policy
Khusrau Parwiz put strangers forth and called
For inkhorn, pen, and silk of Chin, and bade

A scribe attend. He wrote, as Shahs were wont,
Thus in the olden tongue in royal script :—

** Khusrau Parwiz doth swear by holy God,

By circling sun and stable earth that while

I sit as Shah upon the seat of state,

Lord of fran, its treasures and its troops,

I will not ask the chiefs of Rum for tribute,

Or send a host against those fields and fells.

I will restore to Cesar all the cities

Thereof however tradeless they may be

And worthless, and thereafter will return

Their documents and records. Further, I

Am well content to ask of him a daughter
Whose mother is both pure and of his race,
And by so asking illustrate my heart.

Entrust to those [Iranians at thy court,

And under thy protection—Gustaham,

Kharrad, son of Barzin, of royal race,

Shapur and Andiy4n—thy daughter, wise

And high-renowned, when thou dost send the troops.
I am through mine affinity to thee

As my great family were heretofore.

The first was Gaiimart, the next Jamshid—

A source of hope and terror to the world—
Then followed others of the glorious stock,
Great men in wisdom and in royalty.

From those old monarchs, wearers of the crown,

Google

C. 1919
<pb n="270"/>
270 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!

The story runneth on to Kai Kaus,
And Kai Khusrau, and by the selfsame token
To mighty Kai Kubad?! whose justice made
The sheep and wolf akin. Pursue the tale
To Shah Luhrasp through whom to Shah Gushtasp
There came the glorious Asfanfiyar,
That chief of chiefs, from whom sprang great Bahman,
And thus we come to Ardshir PAépakan
*Neath whom our ancient star regained its youth.
Now when Khusrau Parwiz, son of Hurmuzd,
Is one in heart and sentiment with Cesar,
Among whose distant ancestors was Salm
(I seek no fables and I tell no lies)
We shall abolish all the feud between us,
And Ruman and franian will be one.
I do accept from Cesar Cesar’s daughter—
The crown of all his daughters. Whatsoever
May be her faults or virtues it is well,
And holy God is witness to this letter,
Writ in mine own hand known throughout the world,
And I have sealed the letter with my seal
According to our customs, ways, and faith.
For thy successors—world-lords crowned and
throned—
That which is written here shall be my pledge,
With mind and wisdom to corroborate,
That I will keep my word in great and small.
That what I say is true my heart and star,
And holy God, bear witness, so delay not
To act upon thy words, for I have lingered
Long in this city.”
All being said, he gave
The letter to Khurshid, son of Kharrad.
As swift as wind that chieftain rose and mounting
His chestnut steed sped till he came to Cesar,

1 Kai Kubad really preceded the two Shahs previously mentioned.

Google
<pb n="271"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 271

And gave the message of Khusrau Parwiz.
Then Cesar, having snapped the band and read
The words of that exalted Shah, commanded
The wise men and the eloquent to meet
Before him and inquired of them in turn :—
** What cure shall I adopt ? How shall I make
A treaty with the monarch of [ran ?
His letter leaveth us without excuse ;
All we of Rum and of fran are one.”

The chiefs and sages rose to answer him,
And said: “ We are but subjects; thou art Cesar,
The world-lord throned and crowned. Do thou

advise,
Who hast both counsel and authority :
Our bodies and our souls are thine.”
When Ceesar

Heard he commended those shrewd, pious chiefs,
And waited till in the revolving sky
The lamp of day had lost its radiancy.

§19

How Caesar made a Talisman and deceived the Envoys
of Khusrau Parwiz, and how Kharrdd, Son of
Barzin, solved the Mystery

When circling Sol grew pale, and in the tower
Of night the stars were stationed, Cesar bade
His warlocks muse and frame a talisman—

A marvel—somewhere, such as none would know
From real—a woman modest, fair, and seated

In trailing raiment on a goodly throne

With handmaids on both sides of her and slaves
Before her and behind. She was to sit,

Google

C. 1920
<pb n="272"/>
272 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

That moon-faced one in silence, to appear
A woman weeping, and from time to time
To raise one hand and dash her tears away.
The warlocks, as they were instructed, made
The semblance of a woman with long hair,
And all that from a distance gazed thereon
Took it to be a woman lovelorn, bright,
That sorely wept o’er Christ, her cheeks aflame,
Her lashes like Spring-clouds. When of the adepts
That talisman was set up in its place
One went and said to Cesar: ‘“‘ We have finished
The matter in accord to what thou badest.”
When he had heard this from the expert, Cesar
Came from his throne in haste and visited
The talisman. He marvelled at that feat
Of sorcery and sent for Gustaham.
He bounteously rewarded those magicians
With money and with divers other gifts,
Then said to Gustaham: ‘‘ Famed warrior !
I had a daughter beautiful as Spring :
She grew up to a marriageable age.
I had a kinsman, an aspiring one,
To whom I married her with Christian rites.
I countenanced him unadvisedly,
And sent her to his palace. That youth’s soul
Hath gone to Heaven; she is deeply grieved ;
Bright day for her is lapis-lazuli ;
She will not take my rede or speak a word,
And our young world hath agéd through her trouble.
Concern thyself to see her, and employ
The words of men of lore, for thou art wise,
A paladin by race, and she may speak
To thee”’
He said: “I will: it may be I
Shall banish this affection from her breast.”
With cheerful heart and charged with potent words

Google

<pb n="273"/>
KHUSRAU PARWI!IZ 273

That chief approached the guileful talisman,

Which bowed to greet him as he neared its throne.
Illustrious Gustaham sat humbly down,

And spake to that sad dame, beginning boldly

With such advice as seemed to him of profit :—

“*O daughter born of Cesar’s race !”’ he said,

‘* The wise exclaim not at the course of nature:

The flying eagles, lions in the forests,

And fishes in the waters, are not free

From death,”’ but all his words were wind; no soul,
Or tongue had she but ever and anon

Would dash away the tear-drops from her eyes

As her physician talked. While Gustaham

Was lost in wonder Cesar summoned him,

And asked: ‘ How didst thou find that child of mine,
Whose pain and mourning cause me this distress ? ”’

He answered: “I advised her much but vainly.”

The following day said Cesar to Balwi :—
**Go thou with Andiyan. Shaputr withal,
The nobly born, may help to make my heart
Glad in my daughter. Go to that sorrower,
And speak to her about the famous king.

She that is heaping fire upon my head

May answer thee. Be good enough to aid me
By converse with my mourning child; perchance
In view of your high rank she may accept

Your counsels. Sure I am that she will speak
To-day, and when she maketh fair reply

I shall be freed from this disconsolate,

Who raineth tears of blood upon her breast.”

Then those three noble Persians went to her,
And each one strove, but answer gat they none ;
That tongueless dame was mute. The baffled three
Went back to Cesar, that just judge, and said :—
‘* We spake and gave advice as best we could,

But there was no improvement.”

VOL. VIII. S

Google
<pb n="274"/>
274 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!

*°Tis ill hap

For us,” he said, “ to grieve for one in grief.”

Since these great men had failed he had recourse
To great Kharrad, son of Barzin. ‘* Thou art,”
He said, “ one of these chiefs and thou mayst hear
Her voice forthwith,” then sent him to the mourner
From court attended by a trusty servant.
When he arrived he looked upon the mien
Of that crowned form and waited in its presence
No little while. The guileful talisman
Made him a bow of greeting. He observed
The woman, head and foot, most heedfully,
And marked the attendants standing round. He

spake

At large; she answered not a word; that man,
That scion of the chiefs, grew full of thought.
““ If grief hath robbed her of her wits,” he said,
** Why do her servants hold their peace the while ?
If these be very tear-drops from her eyes
One would expect her passion to abate.
She letteth fall the drops upon her breast,
And knoweth not to move to left or right ;
Her tears fall on one spot; she hath not used
One hand or stirred a foot! Had this form life
She would move more than foot or hand, would shed
Her tears, and stretch her other hand, elsewhere.
I see life stir not in her body; ’tis
A talisman of these philosophers.”

He came to Cesar with a smile and said :—
“This moon-faced lady is not rational ;
It is a talisman of Riuman make,
And hath deceived Balwi and Gustaham.
Thy purpose was to laugh at us or charm
Our eyes. Our Shah when he shall hear will smile
With open lips and show his silvern teeth.”’

Said Cesar: “ Live for ever! Thou art fit

Google
<pb n="275"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 275

To be the minister of kings. I have

A wondrous chamber in my palace, one

Can not imagine aught more marvellous.

When thou beholdest it thou wilt not know

Its secret—talisman or work divine.”’
Kharrad, son of Barzin, on hearing this,

Went to that ancient chamber and beheld

A cavalier upstanding, poised in air,

And going back to famous Cesar said :—

“The cavalier is iron and the chamber

Withal is fashioned of the famous ore

Called loadstone by the sages. Those of Rum

Have mounted him upon an Indian steed.

Whoe’er shall read the Indians’ books will find

Both pleasure and enlightenment of mind.”

§ 20

How Kharrdd, Son of Barzin, expounded the Faith of
the Indians and exhorted Caesar

“In what regard,” said Cesar, “‘ do the Indians
Err from the Path ? Those that are worshippers,
Are they idolaters or what are they ?”’
Kharrad, son of Barzin, replied: ‘‘ In Hind
They worship ox and moon, put not their trust
In God and circling heaven, and regard not
Their persons, look no higher than the sun,
And reckon not men like ourselves as wise.
Whoever kindleth fire, shall enter it,
And shall consume himself therein, believeth
That in the air there is a fire ordained
By God, whose word is law, which fire the sage
Of Hind entitleth * Ether’ and hath much

Google

C. 1923
<pb n="276"/>
276 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Of worth and interest to say thereon,

As thus: when earthly and etherial fires

Combine man’s sin is purged ; they must be kindled

Since burning is accounted righteousness.

Withal ye too speak not aright ; hereto

Christ’s life is testimony. Mark’st thou not

What Jesus, son of Mary,! said when he

Was bringing secret things to light ? ‘If one

Shall take thy skirt from thee resist him not,

And if one buffet thee upon the face,

So that thine eyes are darkened by the blows,

Be not enraged or let thy cheek turn pale,

But shut thine eyes and speak no chilling word.’

If thou hast little food let it suffice,

And if thou hast no carpet seek one not.

Hold not this kind of evil to be bad,

And ye without a pang will quit this Gloom.’

But now with you desire is king o’er wisdom,

Your hearts have erred through overweening greed,

For ye have raised your palaces to Saturn,

And camels bear your treasuries’ keys. Besides

The treasures ye have mighty hosts with coats

Of mail from ’Ad and Ruman helms. Ye lead

Hosts everywhere unjustly and allow not

Your swords to rest. The wilderness is all

One fount of blood: Christ led you not to this.

He was a poor, unfurnished man who earned

His bread by toil and lived on curds and milk

With butter for his only other food.

Now when the Jews gat hold of him and saw

Him friendless and without resource they slew him,
C. 1924 And having slain him set him on the gibbet

To make thereby his Faith contemptible.

His father was an ancient man, his mother

» ' fs4 son of Maryam ” in the original.
2S, Mat. v. 39, 40. S. Luke, vi. 29.

Google
<pb n="277"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 277

A temple-keeper and a trier out

Of good and ill.!_ Grown ardent and desirous

Of knowledge, eloquent, instructed, mindful,

He made withal disciples by his teaching,

And compassed in his youth his will by shrewdness.
Thou sayest that he was God’s son and smiled
When slain upon the gibbet !?, At such things
The sage doth smile. If thou art wise fear God,
Who hath no need of consort and of son,

And unto whom all mysteries are clear.

Why turn’st thou from the Faith of Gaiumart,
The path and precedent of Tahmuras,

Which tell us that the Judge of earth is One,
And that our only course is serving Him ?

The experienced thane and worshipper of God,
When muttering prayer he taketh in his hand
The sacred twigs, may taste no drop of water
Albeit for very thirst he dream thereof ;

He trusteth God upon the day of battle,

And asketh not cold water in the fight.

Withal he taketh for his cynosure

The highest element which is above

Earth, air, and water. Our Shahs barter not
Their Faith but list to Him, the Lord of all.
They joy not in dinars and gems but seek

To make their name and mark by justice only,
By gifts of lofty palaces or joying

The hearts of mourners. Fourthly, they pronounce
None wise but one that on the day of battle
Doth veil the bright sun’s face with dust and guardeth
The land from foes. Be curses his, not blessings,
That seeketh from religion aught but right.”

When Cesar heard this he approved ; the words
* According to the Kuran Mary had been dedicated from the
first to the service of God. Zacharias built for her a chamber in

the temple and provided for her. SK, 1. 58 and notes.
2 See p. 190.

Google
<pb n="278"/>
C. 1925

278 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI!I

Seemed profitable to him, and he said :—

** The Maker made thee foremost of the great ;

One needs must hearken to thy pure discourse.

Thou hast the key that openeth the door

Of mysteries. The head of one with liege

Like this is higher than the moon’s own crown.’
Then from his treasury he bade to bring

Dinars and drachms and crown magnifical,

Bestowed them on Kharrdad, son of Barzin,

And uttered many praises: ‘‘ Cultured be

The country of fran,” he said, “ through thee.”

?

§ 21

How Ceasar sent a Host and his Daughter to Khusrau
Parwiz

Now Cesar, when he heard that troops had come,
And that the world was black with horsemen’s dust,
Chose from those Rumans five-score thousand men,
All famed in battle, requisitioned arms,

War-steeds and drachms, and thus much time elapsed.
He had one daughter Maryam hight, wise, grave,
Well counselled and resolved, and later on

Brought forth such stores of bridal bravery

That e’en the speedy baggage-beasts grew slow—
Gold trinkets, jewels that a king might wear,

Gems, gold-embroidered raiment, carpetings,
Brocade of Rim with golden patterns wrought
Upon a ground of silk, torques, bracelets, earrings,
And three most costly and bejewelled crowns.

He had four gilded litters too made ready,

Their curtains decorate with royal gems,

And forty others made of ebony

Google
<pb n="279"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 279

All jewelled like the eye of chanticleer.
Then came three hundred moon-faced waiting-maids
All colour and perfume, five hundred slave-boys
Intelligent and bright with ornaments
Of gold and silver, forty Ruman eunuchs
Fay-faced, illustrious, attractive men,
And four of the philosophers of Rum,
Wise, learned and famed. He gave them their
instructions,
And privily withal charged Maryam
To be obedient, order her desires,
To do her duty, to be bountiful,
As to her food and how to bear herself.
There was, as reckoned in the Ruman way,
More than three hundred millions’ worth? of goods.
To every envoy at his court he gave
A crown inlaid with jewels, robes withal,
Steeds and dinars and much of all things fitting.
He bade write to the Shah on painted silk : —
‘* Well may they raise their necks up to the moon,
These subjects of the Shah! No man more courteous
Than Gustaham hath sprung from small or great.
Is there a champion like the chief Shapur
To act as arbiter? Bdalwi withal
Can keep a secret for he would not sell
His folk for aught, while none though he live long
Will see one like Kharrad, son of Barzin,
Whom God created to solve mysteries.
He is as bright and faultless as the sun,
Divine in rede and deed.”
This written, he summoned
His counsellors and readers of the stars
To fix a lucky day for setting forth,
And started on Bahram with favouring stars
And auguries. He went himself three stages,

1" de dirhems.”’ Moh.

Google

C. 1926
<pb n="280"/>
280 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!

And then resigned the conduct of the host,
Bade Maryam come to him, conversed with her
At large, and said: “* Be ware of putting off
Thy girdle till thou comest to fran. |
Khusrau Parwiz must see thee not unveiled
Till then or things unlooked for may befall thee,”’
Then bade her tenderly farewell: ‘“‘ May heaven
Protect thee on thy way.”
He had a brother,
The valiant Niyatus, who led his host
In that campaign, and “ Maryam is akin
To thee,” he said, “in blood and, I would add,
In Faith. I charge thee with her, with this
wealth,
And this well ordered army.”
Niyatus
Accepted all from Czesar who, this said,
Turned back in tears. The host marched toward
Warigh,
Led on by Niyatus with mace and sword.
Khusrau Parwiz, on hearing that the host
Had come, set out with forces from that city,
And when the leaders’ dust-clouds and the flags
Of those mailed cavaliers appeared, and when
The troops came onward cloud-like, lapped in iron,
In helmet and cuirass, his heart laughed out,
Like Spring-tide roses, at that fine array ;
He plucked up heart and gave his steed the heel.
He saw, embraced, and greeted Niyatus,
And testified his gratitude to Cesar,
Who had endured such toil and with that toil
Of ordering the host had rendered void
His treasury ; then going to the litter
Beheld the face of Maryam through her veil,
Saluted her and kissed her hand, rejoicing
To look upon the Fair. He bore her off

Google
<pb n="281"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 281

To his encampment where he gave his Moon
A bower and passed three days in converse with her.
Upon the fourth when Sol, the world’s light, shone
They gat in readiness a choice pavilion,
And summoned Niyatus, Sarkab, and Kut,
The bold, with other chiefs both great and small,
Whom thus the Shah addressed: ‘“‘ What chiefs and
WalrTiors
Are here, such men as brandish sword and mace,
In battle reck not of their lives, and turn not
From lion or from leopard in the fray ? ”’
Then Niyatus made choice of seventy men
To lead in fight ; each had beneath his banner
A thousand chosen, lance-armed cavaliers.
Khusrau Parwiz beheld this picked array
Of noble horsemen eager for the strife ;
He praised the Maker of heaven, time, and earth,
He praised too Niyatus, his troops withal,
And noble Cesar and his realm, and said :—
“If God almighty aid me in this war
I will display my puissance and make
Earth like a sea for jewels; ye shall joy
At having come and rather tell thereof
Than hold your peace: heaven’s airs shall breathe
love-fraught
From pleasance, friendship be our only thought.”

§ 22

How Khusrau Parwiz led his Host to Azar Abddagdn
and how Bandwt met him on the Way

Upon the seventh day that comely Shah
Arrayed his host as ’twere the turning sky,
The din of tymbals went up from the court,

Google

C. 1927
<pb n="282"/>
C. 1928

282 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

And air grew ebon with the dust of troops.
He chose a force of Persians and set out
Toward Azar Abddagan. There passed

Two weeks what while by order of the Shah
The soldiers concentrated at his camp.

He pitched it on the plain of Dik; the army
Was great and under Ruman discipline.

He gave the whole host up to Niyatus,

Thus saying: “ Thou art master of the flock,”
And thence with certain valiant cavaliers

Let his swift steed have rein and made toward
Khanjast—an anxious journey—till he reached
Mausil, the Armenian, who could hold his own
Among the great and had with him Bandwi,
The Shah’s maternal uncle. Now these twain,
On hearing that Khusrau Parwiz was stirring,
Sped from the waste to meet him on the way,
Preceding their own troops. To Gustaham
The Shah said, seeing them upon the road :—
““O warrior! two are hurrying o’er the field :
See who they are and wherefore in such haste.”

He answered: ‘Sure am JI, O king! that he
Who rideth on the piebald is my brother,

The brave Bandwi: his friend is not of us.”

The Shah said: ‘“ What! How canst thou know

him? Nay,
Seek him in ward if living and if slain
Upon a gibbet in the riding-ground.”

Said Gustaham: “‘O Shah! regard him well
From this side: ’tis thine uncle: let me die
For saying so if it prove otherwise.”

Afoot the twain approached the shady spot
Where was the Sh4h, praised him and did obeisance.
He gave Bandwi a welcome and observed :—

‘* I said that I should find thee hid in dust.”

He told the Shah all that had chanced to him,

Google
<pb n="283"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 283

His ruse of putting on the royal robes,
And all Bahram Chubina’s clemency.
Khusrau Parwiz wept greatly at the tale,
Then asked him: ‘‘ Who is this ? ”
“QO sun-faced Shah !
Hast thou no kindly welcome for Mausil ? ”’
He answered. ‘“‘ Since thou left’st fran for Rim
He hath not slept in lands inhabited,
But camped upon the plain, his palace been
Tent and pavilion. The troops with him
Are many; he hath all the gear of greatness,
With drachms and treasures. Now he hath been
waiting
Upon the road and longed for thy return.”’
** How came it,”’ asked the world-lord of Mausil,
‘* That all thy toil was hidden? We will strive
To give thee happy days and make thy name
The greatest of the great.”
Mausil replied :—
‘“* Give me new life, O king! Let me approach
And kiss thy stirrup while I praise thy Grace
And splendour.”
“ For these words,’”’ replied the Shah,

‘* T will make bright thy gains to pay thy pains,
Will grant thy wish and set thy name on high
Above the great.”

Then he withdrew one foot
Out of the stirrup, and that ardent soul,
All eagerness, kissed foot and stirrup both,
O’ercome by veneration for the Shah,
Who, when that loyal liege was satisfied,
Bade him remount and urged his own steed on
Across that barren waste until he reached
Azargashasp. With muttered prayer he entered
The Fire-fane, with an aching heart. A priest,
The Zandavasta in his hand, approached

Google

C. 1929
<pb n="284"/>
284 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

The pious Shah who, loosing from his loins
His golden belt, flung jewels on the Fire,
And in his prayers outdid the priest himself.
“Just Judge!” he said, “ bring my foes’ heads to
dust.
Thou knowest that I justly plead and purpose
To keep the path of good. Approve not Thou
The injustice of the unjust.”
This said, he girt

His golden belt and sought the plain of Duk
With wounded heart in trouble for his way :
Night fell ere he reached camp.

He sent shrewd spies
To learn the posture of the world’s affairs,
And when the army of Nimruz had heard :—
** The Shah, the lustre of the world, hath come,”
They bound the drums upon the elephants,
And earth became as ’twere the river Nile.
All folk at that intelligence, which made
Them young again, drew near to give him aid.

§ 23
How Bahrém Chibina had Tidings of the Coming of

Khusrau Parwiz and wrote to the Chiefs of [rdn,
and how the Letter fell into the Hands of Khusrau
Parwiz and his Answer

Bahram Chubina heard: “ The Grace of kingship
Hath been revived,” and cast his eyes on one
Devoted to himself, one of the host,

Aspiring, sage, fair-famed—Dara Panah—

Then called a scribe of note whom he instructed
To write him letters of great charge to all

Google
<pb n="285"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 285

The valiant leaders—Gustaham, Bandwi,

Gurdwi, the warrior (for he had won

That name from all the other chiefs), Shapur,

And Andiyan, the cavalier, and all

That were the living memories of the great.

The letters! ran: “I offer to the Maker

Mine adoration privily that ye

May all awake from sleep and hasten not

To ill on this wise for from verge to centre,

With this Sasanian race in evidence,

Things worsen through their wrangling and self-
seeking.

Ardshir, sprung from Papak, was first to bring

Confusion on the world, his scimitar

O’ershadowed all his age and mazed the Great ;

And first of all I instance Ardawan

With other chiefs of ardent soul whose names

Are lacking on the earth to this throne’s grief.

Then surely ye have heard of what befell,

Through ill-advised Piruz, to Sufarai.

He freed Kubad from fetters and Kubad,

Of all the chieftains, gave him to the wind ;

For when malevolent Kubad grew strong

He put away his virtues, took to crime,

Slew this illustrious and devoted man,

And soured the nobles’ hearts. He that aggrieveth

His kin, preferring passion to his child,

Would injure strangers more. No one would look

For ivory in ebony; so put not

Your only trust in the Sdsanians,

Or seek for jewels in red willow-trees.

When they shall bring this letter unto you

May your Urmuzd prove gracious. Ye possess

A place illustrious in my regard ;

? The word is used here sometimes in the singular and sometimes
inthe plural. Several copies were made of the letter actually written.

Google

C. 1930
<pb n="286"/>
C. 1931

286 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

The breast and sleeves are all one with the shirt ;
Our place for rest and sleep by dark or day
Is one, and when ye join me ye will brighten
My gloomy soul. I reck not of the Rimans,
Or of their king, and will tread down their heads
And throne.”’
They sealed the letters with his seal,
And then the envoy went in merchants’ guise
In haste to where Khusrau Parwiz held court.
He had a caravan of various goods,
And with the letters carried presents too.
He marked the grandeur and great host wherefor,
Thou wouldst have said: “‘ Earth hath no thorough-
fare,”

And thought: “ With such a king who will confide
In brave Bahram Chubina ? I am Persian,
I carry thirty camels’ loads of goods,
And have no foes; why should I wreck myself
When majesty hath risen from the abyss ?
I will deliver to Khusrau Parwiz |
The letters—an unlooked for offering.”’

Perturbed he reached the Shah’s court with those

letters,

And all the presents of that hostile liege ;
He brought the drachms, the letters, and the gifts,
Revealing all. The world-lord having read
Assigned the messenger a golden seat,
And said to him: “O man exceeding wise !
Speak of Bahram Chubina as one vile
In our regard. Thou hast attained thine end,
But make it not a feather in thy cap.’”?

Then sending for a scribe he had an answer,
Such as the case required, drawn up at large :—
‘“* Brave and exalted chief! we have perused
Thy letters and been privy with thine envoy.

' By boasting of it.

Google
<pb n="287"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 257

In word we battle for Khusrau Parwiz,
But sre to thee like new Spring in our hearts.
When thou hast led thine army hither who
Will reck of Rum or Rumans ? We will draw
Our scimitars and slay them in the fight.
Khusrau Parwiz, when he shall see thine host,
Thy prowess and pre-eminence, will quail
At heart upon the battle-day and flee
Like fox before thee.”’ ;
Having sealed the letters
He gave them to that loyal chief and said :—
‘‘ For this thy conduct, sage! thou shalt have fruit
From toil,” then gave him jewels and dinars,
And many precious gems. “Convey,” he said,
‘** These to Bahram Chubina and recount
What thou hast heard, and thou shalt want for
nothing
When my high fortune brighteneth.”’
From court
Dara Panah departed and achieved
His journey like the wind. The youth delivered
The letters which the paladin received.
When that aspirant had perused the letter
He summoned greed and banished rede, and led
By what the letters said prepared to march.
The [ranians were amazed. The elders went,
On seeing that blind act, and said: ‘“‘ Depart not,
Or thy young day will age. Khusrau Parwiz,
If he invadeth us, will only find
The maces and the scimitars of war ;
But do not thou betray the royal throne,
Or fortune will beguile thee forwardly.’’!
1 The meaning seems to be :—"' If you remain on the defensive
you may rely on the people supporting you against Khusrau Parwiz
backed up, as he will be, by foreign troops ; but if you assume the

offensive you will throw away this advantage and so betray your
own cause.”

Google
<pb n="288"/>
C. 1932

288 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!

Their words were vain ; he bade the host assemble ;
He loaded up the baggage, called to horse,
Struck up the drums, and led the army forth.
That valiant armament of Persians reached
Azar Abddagan. Host drew near host,
And ant and fly were barred from thoroughfare.
That warring subject said: ‘I fain would scan
Yon host and see what Ruman cavaliers
Are like, and if their troops are troops or what.”

Then with Yalan-sina and with the chief,
Izid Gashasp, the warriors all mounted
Upon their steeds. These magnates went to view
The hostile host, saw and returning told
Their chief: “‘ Yon host is boundless! The affair
Is other than we deemed.”’

Upon their side

The Ruman horsemen of the Shah arrived
In all haste at the place of audience,
And girding up their loins exclaimed: ‘‘ We long
To battle with the Iranians,” which thing
Accorded to the wishes of the king.

§ 24

How Khusrau Parwiz fought with Bahram Chibina
and how Kut, the Riman, was slain

When Sol rose o’er the darksome hills the war-cry
Ascended from both hosts ; thou wouldst have said :—
** Earth is a turning sky and swords eclipse

The sun!” The troops drew up to left and right;
Earth was an iron mountain. At the neighing

Of chargers and the shouting of the hosts

The desert fled for shelter to the hills.

Google
<pb n="289"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 289

When brave Bahram Chubina saw he drew

His glittering glaive, his heart conceived no fears

Though raging lions’ hearts were rent asunder.}

He went himself to view the left and right,

And told Yalan-sina: “ Take thou the centre,

And keep before the army for I champion

The troops to-day and tarry though they flee.”
Khusrau Parwiz surveyed the battlefield,

And saw the whole world blackened by the hosts ;

The bright sun’s face was like a lion’s maw,

And thou hadst said: “The clouds are raining

swords ! ”’

Then Niyatuis, Bandwi, and Gustaham

Went with the Shah from battlefield to height.

Those leaders took their station on Mount Dik,

Their eyes upon their followers, and thence

The Shah surveyed his host, the right and left,

The centre and the wings. The tymbals sounded

From both sides and the eager warriors

Advanced to fight. ‘“‘ Earth is an iron mountain,”
Thou wouldst have said, ‘“‘ heaven lost in foemen’s
dust !”’

Now when Khusrau Parwiz saw matters thus,
_ Saw heaven as woof and earth as warp, he prayed
Thus in the olden tongue: ‘‘O Thou more pure,
And higher than the high! who but Thyself,
O holy Judge! can tell which will return
Exulting from the fight to-day ? The spear
Of him whose fortune halteth hath but thorn
Or weed for point.”’

. Khusrau Parwiz was full
Of care, both heart and soul; the world appeared
A brake to him, for from among the troops
-Kut, like a dark hill in his iron mail,
Brake from the centre to the height and cried :-—

1 Couplet omitted.
VOL. VIII. T

Google

C. 1933
<pb n="290"/>
290 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

** Tllustrious monarch! point me out the slave,
The doer of div’s work, ’gainst whom thou foughtest
When in fran and fleddest while he triumphed.
Look to the army’s left and right, and find him
Among the chieftains. I will teach him warfare,
And show what hearts and might true warriors have.”’

Thereat all mindful of the former fight
The Shah was vexed at heart because Kut said :—
‘““ Thou didst let fall thy knightly equipage,
And flee before a slave,’’ but answered not ;
His heart was full, he sighed. At length he said :—
‘** Approach yon rider on the piebald steed ;
He will attack thee when he seeth thee ;
Then fly not lest thou bite thy lips in shame.”

Kut sped back hke the wind and spear in hand
Came furious as a maddened elephant
Upon the battlefield. Yaldn-sina
Called to Bahram Chubina, saying: “ Beware,
Brave cavalier! A div armed with a lance,
And with a lasso in his straps, hath come
Like elephant gone mad.”

He heard, unsheathed
Like wind his falchion and proclaimed his name,
Which when the Shah observed he rose and peered
Down from the mountain-top upon the pair,
Wet-eyed and wroth of heart. Now when the Riman
Charged with his lance the aspirant gripped his steed,
Escaped the thrust, raised to his face his shield,
And clave his foe asunder to the breast.
The sword’s clash reached Khusrau Parwiz who
laughed
To see the stroke struck by Bahram Chubina,
While valaint Niyatus frown-blinded raged
Because the Shah had laughed, and said: “ Great
sir !

One should not laugh in war whereof thou knowest

Google
<pb n="291"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 291

Naught but the sleights, and when thou wouldst
avenge

Thine ancestors I see thy heart asleep.

Men will not see in any peopled part

Of Rum or of fran one like to Kut,

Hazara’s son, whose slaying made thee laugh.

Know this, that fortune hath deserted thee.”
He made reply: ‘I laugh not at his slaughter,

Or at his body which is cleft in twain.

' Know this that he who mocketh shall receive

Himself a buffet from the turning sky.

He said to me: ‘ Thou fleddest from a slave

With whom thou hadst not prowess to contend.’

But fleeing from this slave who striketh blows

In such wise in the battle is no shame.”
Bahram Chubina for his part exclaimed :—

““ Ye chiefs of glorious birth—Yalan-sina,

Ram and Izid Gashasp! bind ye the slain

Upon his charger and thus send him back

To his own camp for their own Shah to see.”
They hasted to secure upon the saddle

The corpse of Kut, and then the charger sped

Back to the camp with that exalted chief.

Khusrau Parwiz was grieved at heart for Kut.

They loosed the knotted lasso from the slain,

Then by the Shah’s direction dried the body,

And having filled with musk and stitched the wounds,

Sewed up the corpse in linen and dispatched it,

All armed and girded, unto Cesar, saying :—

“‘ If this infernal slave can give such blows

In time of battle with his scimitar

I am not shamed for having fled from him.”
The Rumans were heart-broken ere they fought,

And sorely stricken ; their patricians wept ;

They all were tearful and dispirited.

Ten thousand of the mighty men advancing

Google

C. 1934
<pb n="292"/>
C. 1935

292 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

All prelates,* warriors, and cavaliers,
Charged so that hills split at the cry of them.
The clash of arms, the shoutings of the chiefs,
The blows of scimitar and massive mace,
Rose. Thou hadst said: ~ It is a raging sea,
And heaven as it turneth crieth * Blood.’ ”’
The hosts were blocked and sundered by the slain ;
An army of those Ruman chiefs had fallen.
Khusrau Parwiz was stricken to the heart,
And had the wounds of those still living dressed.
They piled the corpses mountain-high ; men called it
‘The harvest of Bahram.” Khusrau Parwiz
Lost faith in Rumans for he said: ‘ If they
Bear them like this again know that their host
Will cease to be and all their swords of steel
Prove merely wax.”
Then said he to Sarkab :—

“ To-morrow take no Rumans to engag®:
But rest and I will lead the frdnian host
To battle.”

To the franians he said :—
‘No more delay ; to-morrow ye must fight,”
And one and all replied: ‘* We will not fail
To level to the plain mount, waste, and dale.”

§ 25

How Khusrau Parwtz fought with Bahrdim Chibina the
second Time, was defeated, and escaped from him

by the Help of Surush

When day’s white banner rose aloft the main,
And when the stars grew hopeless of the dark,
The drummers went forth from both camp-enclosures

1 Cf. Vol. 1. Pp. 373-

Google
<pb n="293"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 293

With elephants and clarions. There rose
The sound of pipes and horns, the trumpeting
Of elephants, and clash of brazen cymbals.
Thou wouldst have said: “ The plains and uplands
heave,
The sun’s face is like raven’s plumes,” and when
The Iranians ranged their ranks and grasped their
spears,
And Indian swords, thou wouldst have said: ‘“‘ The
earth
Is all cuirass, the spear-heads light the stars! ”’
Whenas Khusrau Parwiz arrayed the centre
The troops took heart. Gurdwi, that brave aspirant,
Commanded on the right, and on the left
A famed Armenian! with cuirass and sword
Like Ahriman’s. Sh4pur with Sipansar
And Andiyan drew tight their loins for battle,
While close beside the Shah was Gustaham -
To guard him from the foe.
Bahram Chubina,
The hero, seeing not the Rumans, paused
In silence, then commanded and they bound
The drums upon the elephants; the world
Was like the Nile. The elephant he rode
Was white and his antagonist despaired.
He charged the Shah’s right, shouting to Shapur :—
““O knave! *twas not thy promise in thy letter
To come against me on this field of blood !
This is not Persians’ usage, and thou givest
Thy body to be slaughtered all for naught.”’
Shapur replied to him: ‘ Thou div-like one!
Thou hast lost all thy wits in slavery.
Whose name and token did the letter bear
Of which thou speak’st in presence of the lords ? ”
Then great Khusrau Parwiz said to Shapur :—

* Mausill.

Google

C. 1936
<pb n="294"/>
294 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

‘“* That letter was to match with his designs ;
I and the other nobles of the host

Will compensate thee for it. In due season
I will explain and purge thee of suspicion.”’

Bahram Chubina heard Khusrau Parwiz,
Perceived the ruse, was both enraged and shamed,
And in his wrath resolved on fight. The usurper
Charged all alone upon his elephant
The centre of the army of the Shah,

Who saw and said to Andiyan: “ Fierce lion !
Shower arrows on yon elephant and make
Your bows like clouds in Spring.”’

The frdnians,
All that were fortune-favoured, strung their bows.
The elephant’s trunk was riddled so with shafts
That thou hadst said: “It is a Nile!’ Forthwith
Bahram Chubina called for horse and helm,
King-worthy, and the arrows showered anew
Upon that proud one’s steed. The warrior
Alighting, girt his mail-skirts round his waist,
And then with buckler raised above his head
Brought Doomsday with his trenchant scimitar
Upon the foe who dropped their bows of Chach,
Andran. They broughtahorse. He mounted raging,
And shouting charged the centre of the foe—
The station of the Shah—and pierced it through:
The standard of the leader disappeared.
Thence went he toward the foe’s right and outflanked
. The Persians and the baggage.2 Now Gurdwi
Commanded there—a man of valiance
And of ambition. When he saw his brother
He strung and drew his bow. Those men of blood
Closed; thou hadst said: ‘They mingle.” Long

they strove,

And neither would give way. Bahram Chubina

1 “de sang.’’ Mohl. * Couplet omitted.

Google
<pb n="295"/>
KHUSRAU PARW!IZ 295

Cried: ‘‘ Miscreant ! wherefore girdest thou thy loins
To shed thy brother’s blood ? ”
Gurdwi replied :—

** Old wolf! hast thou not heard the weighty saw :—
‘A brother as a friend is good: forego
Both skin and vein if he become thy foe.’
Thou art a man of blood, a miscreant,
An Ahriman, the Maker’s enemy
At heart. No one of honour and repute
Will come against his brother in the fight.”

Bahram Chiubina, hearing this, withdrew
In anger and high dudgeon, while Gurdwi,
His martial countenance a-gloom with iron,
Proceeded to the Shah. Khusrau Parwiz
Commended him right lovingly and said :—
** May turning heaven reward thee.”

Then the Shah

Made toward the centre, where his warriors reeled,
And sent one to Shapur. ‘“ Assist Mausil,”’
He said, “ put forth your power, fight back to back,
And ye may compass shining fortune yet.”

At that time said the king to Gustaham :—
If any Ruman shareth in this fight
Then when Bahram Chubina hath been worsted,
Or even wounded, they will raise their heads
Up to the sky and brag immeasurably.
I would not have the Rumans waxing proud,
And glorying over us about the war.
I have seen all their prowess; they are like
A flock in Winter. Twill be best for me
To fight with him short-handed ; I require not
Aid from another for I trust in God,
The Succourer.”’

Said Gustaham: “ O king!

Conspire not thou against thine own sweet life ;
But if thou art determined choose some comrades ;

Google

C. 1937
<pb n="296"/>
296 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

Wreck not thy person on this battlefield.”

Khusrau Parwiz rejoined: “* What thou hast said

Is well, so make thy choice of some to help}

Out of the army.”

Gustaham selected

Twice seven franian horsemen brave and proud.

He wrote himself down first upon the list,

Then brave Shaptr with Andiyan, Bandwi,

Gurdwi—the prop of kings—Azargashasp,

And then Shirzil, Rangwi who could outface

The lion and the elephant, Tukhara—

A help in fight and to Yalan-sina

A mortal foe—illustrious Khusrau, ‘

And Farrukhzad, Ustad son? of Piruz,

Who caused his enemies to melt away,

Urmuzd and fortunate Khurshid—a pair

To whom their foemen were as grass. Their chief

Was gallant Gustaham expert in war.

On this wise he made choice of fourteen men,

And hurried with them from the host apart.

Khusrau Parwiz harangued those chiefs and said :—
C. 1938 “* My noble followers! look ye all to God,

Be blithe of heart and smiling. Naught will chance

But as He willeth while this ancient sky

Endureth. Better perish in the fight

Than have a slave to rule us. Ye must be

My body-guard and instant in the fray.”

All blessed him, hailed him king of earth and vowed
That none of them would quit him in the strife.
The monarch heard, was reassured, rejoiced,

And well contented with those warriors.

He left the host with glorious Bahram,

And went forth with those fourteen combatants,
While from the look-out rose a shout forthwith :
They told Bahram Chubina: “ Troops have come.”

? Reading with P. * Id.

Google
<pb n="297"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 297

That vigilant aspirant gat to horse
With lasso in the straps and sword in hand.
When from his steed he saw the sum of them
He chose him some few warriors and spake
Thus to Yalan-sina: ‘“‘ Yon miscreant
Hath proved that he is hardy in the fight,
For now I know that none but he would venture
Upon this field of vengeance. He hath come
Attended by a troop like this to battle,
But it may be to face the crocodile !
There are not more than twenty cavaliers,
And not one of them do I recognise ! ’”}
Then to Izid Gashasp? and to Yalan-sina
He said: ‘ Men hide not valour. Four of us
Will do, for fortune is a greater friend
To me than to Khusrau Parwiz.”’
He gave
The host to one hight Janfurtiz, who loved
The night’s gloom more than day, and then went forth
Himself and sped on with the wary three.
Khusrau Parwiz perceived Bahram Chubina,
And told his comrades: ‘‘ There hath come a troop.
Be not perturbed for ’tis my time to stand.
Leave it to me and with my mace to deal
With vile Bahram Chubina: be it yours
To combat with his chiefs. Ye are fourteen
To three and may ye never see defeat.”
Then with his Ruman soldiers Niyatus
Must needs gird up the loins and from the field
Of fight they made their way toward the heights
To view both companies and all exclaimed :—
*“ Why bartereth the great Shah life for crown ?
Abundant horse are left and yet he goeth
To fight in person recklessly ! ”’
All raised

1 Couplet omitted. * Reading with P.

Google

C. 1939
<pb n="298"/>
298 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSTI

Their hands to heaven because they deemed him slain.
Now when Bahram Chubina and his comrades—
Yaldn-sina and brave [zid Gashasp!—
Charged, all the comrades of Khusrau Parwiz
Took flight. Bahram Chubina was the wolf,
These nobles were the flock and full of dudgeon
When they beheld that div escaped from bonds :
Howbeit Bandwi, Gurdwi, and Gustaham
Stayed with the Shah till, with a prayer to God,
He also, left resourceless, turned his steed,
Pressed by Izid Gashasp.? ‘“ My fate,” he said,
Is on me! Why in folly did I court
This Doomsday, for the folk have looked upon
My back in flight ? ”
Said Gustaham: “ The horsemen

Approach us: wherefore shouldst thou fight alone ? ’”

The Shah looked back and saw Bahram Chibina
The foremost of the four, and then to save
Himself cut loose his charger’s sable mail.
His three? companion-horsemen lagged behind ;
His vengeful foe pursued. A narrow gorge
Confronted him. Behind him warriors three
Came on like pards. The gorge was barred by rocks.
The world-lord was afar from his own troops.
That glorious youth dismounted fain to scale
Afoot in haste the heights. His path was barred :
The heart of that famed man was sore thereat.
He might not tarry and he could not flee,
While after him came fierce Bahram Chubina,
Who called to him: ‘‘O knave! the abyss is yawning
Before thy height of greatness! Why hast thou
-Thus shouldered thine own fate and brought it me ? ”’

Then straitened with the scimitar behind,
The rocks in front, the Shah cried: “ God almighty,
Who art above the processes of time!

2 Id. * Id. 2 Id,

Google
<pb n="299"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 299

Thou art my succour in my helpless strait :
I ery not unto Mercury and Saturn.”

Or ever from the mountain rose that cry
Surush, the glorious, grew manifest
Upon the pathway, garbed in green and riding
A white steed. At that sight Khusrau Parwiz
Recovered confidence. Surush drew near,
And having grasped the prince’s hand (such things
Are not a marvel with all-holy God)
And borne him from his foe, placed him in safety,
And then let go his hold.

** What is thy name ? ”’
Khusrau Parwiz inquired and spake and wept
By turns. He said: “Surtsh. Thou art in safety ;
Lament no more. Henceforth Great King art thou,
And shouldst be naught but holy.”’
Having said,

He vanished: none hath looked on such a marvel.
Bahram Chubina saw and, all astound,
Invoked the Maker oft. A trembling came
Upon him when he saw his purpose foiled.
He said: ‘* May pluck ne’er fail me while I fight
With men, but now that it hath come to fays
I needs must weep for my beclouded fortunes.”

For his part Niyatus upon the mountain
Asked God’s protection, Maryam tore her cheeks
In anguish for her world-lord spouse. The host
Filled mountain, plain, and dale, the Rumans’ hearts
Were grieved and seared. Said Niyatus to her:
“Stay here; I fear me that the Shah is lost.”

With that upon the mountain’s further side,
Far from the troops, Khusrau Parwiz appeared.
That famed host joyed and Maryam’s heart was eased.
He came to her, informed her of that marvel,
And thus he said: “O spouse of Cexsar’s line !
The just Judge hath done justice unto me ;

Google

C. 1940
<pb n="300"/>
C. 1941

300 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

’Twas not through slackness or through cowardice,!
For cowards show their slackness in the fight.
I was companionless within the gorge,

And in my trouble called upon tne Maker,
And He that ordereth the world’s affairs
Revealed to me, His slave, His hidden purpose.
Not glorious Faridtn or Tur or Salm,

Or yet Afrasiyab, e’er dreamed such things,
For, nobles ! what I looked upon to-day
Betokeneth victory and sovereignty.

Renew the struggle and remember me.”

§ 26

How Khusrau Parwiz fought the third Time with Bahram
Chubina and defeated him

Forthwith the host descended from the mountain ;
The world was blackened by the horsemen’s dust.
Bahram Chubina for his part was troubled,
Repenting all his conduct, but advanced,
Not having any choice, his powers apace.
There was no daylight left. He said: “ All those
Commanding troops need wisdom, mastery,
And courage. Seeing how I ply the dart,
And have the making of a paladin,
The brave preferred me to Khusrau Parwiz,
And I will bring the crown of Nushirwan
To dust.”

Advancing rashly toward the Shah
He strung his bow and loosed a whole wood arrow,
Which in a moment struck the Shah’s belt whence
It dangled point-arrested by the silk.

* "que je me suits enfut.”” Mohl.

Google
<pb n="301"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 301

A slave that saw came and extracted it
From the brocade. The Shah’s spear struck his
foe
Upon the belt which was of mail and broke not,
But though the spear-head snapped the usurper
quailed.

The Shah, indignant that his spear was broken,
Brought down his mace upon his foeman’s casque.
The mace’s head was broken by the blow,
And stuck upon the crest, while all that saw,
Or heard the iron ring, acclaimed the Shah,
Whose troops were heartened, for Bahram Chubina
Had had a check, who, when the sun and moon
Loured on him, turned reluctantly away,
Aware how hard his task had grown—one past
Both prowess and endeavour. The Shah’s host,
When they beheld his lion-manlihood,
All—Rumans and franians—unsheathed
The sword of vengeance and charged mountain-like
In mass. The magnates followed in his steps,
And utterly o’erthrew those mighty powers.
Bandwi came to the Shah and said: “ O thou,
Whose crown is higher than the sky and moon !
This host like ants and locusts is dispersed
Upon the plain, the sands, and stony ground.
It is unworthy to shed needless blood,
And for the Shah to strive against his slave.
"Tis better that they should appeal to us
For quarter than be slain or maimed in fight.”

Khusrau Parwiz replied: “ I seek not vengeance
On any that repent. I grant them grace ;
They are the earrings of my crown.”

Night’s flag

Rose o’er the darksome hills, both hosts withdrew,
The sentries challenged, bells rang, and the troops
Had little sleep. Bandwi, the ambitious, went

Google
<pb n="302"/>
C. 1942

302 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

Between the hosts, chose from the troops a chief—

A herald fluent, with a goodly voice—

Bade him to mount upon his Arab steed,

And make him ready to proclaim. They rode

Between the hosts till close upon the foe,

And then the herald shouted: ‘‘O ye slaves,

In fault yourselves and followers of fortune !

By God! the Shah will pardon all, e’en those

That have done worst and in the war achieved

Most fame, be their faults patent or concealed.”
The sound went through the darkness of the

night,

And all gave ear. Bahram Chubina’s chiefs

Girt up their loins to quit him. When the sun

Rose o’er the hills, and day spread taffeta

Upon the ground, the tents upon the plain

Were all abandoned, but Bahram Chubina

Was not aware of what had passed that night.

None but his friends were to be seen in camp.

On hearing of the troops he visited

The tents and told his comrades: ‘ To retreat

Is better now than waking on a Doomsday.”’
He bade the master of his camels furnish

Two thousand lusty and foam-scattering,

And all his treasures that were portable,

The hangings and the carpets and the plate

Of gold and silver, with the ivory thrones,

The golden torques, the armlets and the crowns,

They loaded up and then themselves took seat

Upon their steeds and girt them for retreat.

Google

<pb n="303"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 303

§ 27

How Khusrau Parwiz sent an Army under Nastuh}
after Bahrdm Chibina, and how Bahrdm Chibina
captured him and reached the Khan of Chin

Whenas the bright sun had arrayed its throne
Exploring parties went out from the Shah ;
They found the chieftain’s tent unoccupied,
While of the other tents not many stood.

The scouts came in and told Khusrau Parwiz,
Who grieved the more about that battlefield.”
He choose three thousand cavaliers in mail

On barded steeds, then bade Nastuh to mount,
And gird his warlike loins for the pursuit.

He went in dudgeon; he was not the man

To fight Bahram Chubina who the while,
Uncertain of his kingdom and his rights,

Kept with himself his silver and his gold,

And marched all fearful by a trackless route.
Yalan-sina and brave Izid Gashasp

Rode by the soldiers’ side conducting them
Along those wayless ways and as they went
Told stories of the Shahs. They saw afar

A ruined hamlet where no chief could dwell,
And as Bahram Chiubina rode ahead,
Remorseful and in dudgeon, he and all

His men athirst, he found a carline’s cot.

In courteous terms they asked for bread and water.
She brought a worn-out sieve, laid down a sheep-skin,
All tattered, and set out upon the sieve

Dry bread. Yalan-sina then handed him

The sacred twigs who thought not in his grief

» Reading with P.
* Because Bahram Chubfna had escaped.

Google

C. 1943
<pb n="304"/>
304 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Of muttering prayer.! They ate, then asked for wine,
And prayed.
‘* If ye would have wine,” said the crone,
There is some, and I have too an old gourd,
The end of which I cut off even now,
Have made a cup, and set it by the wine.”’
Bahram Chubina said: ‘“ If wine is there,
What better cup could be ?”
She went and fetched them,
And he was well content to use that cup.
He gave it brimming to her that she might
Be festive too, and said: “ My gracious mother !
What tidings hast thou of the world’s affairs ? ”
‘““ My brain is worn out, I have heard so much,”
She answered. ‘‘ Many came from town to-day,
And talked but of Bahram Chubina’s battle,
How all his troops deserted to the Shah,
And how the chief fled hostless.”’
** Pious dame ! ”’
He answered, “ say if he hath acted wisely
Or followed his desires.” |
‘* Famed man!”’ she said,
‘* How is it that the Div hath dimmed thine eyes ?
Dost thou not know that since Bahram Chubina,
Son of Gashasp, urged on his steed against
Khusrau Parwiz, son of Hurmuzd, the sages
Laugh at him? None accounteth him a chief.”
Bahram Chubina said: “ Since his desires
Have made him quaff wine from a gourd do thou
Keep barley-bread for him on this old sieve
Until next barley-harvest.’”?

* Couplet omitted.

* 4.e. ‘‘ Since I have been led into wrong-doing by my desires let
me continue to fare badly ’’—words put into Bahram Chubina’s
mouth by the author or redactor of the Romance. This is another
instance of the legitimist feeling pervading this portion of the poem.
See Vol. vi. p. 251.

Google
<pb n="305"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 305

Having eaten
He passed withal the night there in his tunic,
His shoulders on his breastplate, but sleep came not:
He found no rest—to vain desires a prey.

Whenas the sun in heaven made secrets clear
The warlike chieftain had the tabor sounded,
What troops he had he gathered, and those nobles
Set forth and came upon a goodly reed-bed,

And many folk were harvesting the reeds,
‘Who when they saw afar Bahram Chubina
With his large body of determined men,
Said: ‘ Blest be thou! Why take the reed-bed thus ?
In front are many troops with hands blood-bathed
For fight.”
“They must be horse,”’ he made reply,
‘“ Sent by the king. I heard, when we resolved
To quit our camp, that he had chosen Nastuh,
A man ambitious but inapt, to lead
Three thousand cavaliers—stiff opposites
In battle—in pursuit of us. When I
Behold him I will end his days. Now tighten
Your girths and ring him in.”
The cavaliers
Drew tight their girths and grasped their Indian
swords.
They fired the reed-bed and o’erthrew their foes :
That bed of reeds was utterly consumed,
This man was slain, that burnt. Bahram Chubina,
The warrior, perceived Nastuh and gave
His fleet steed rein, and with the lasso’s noose
Unhorsed Nastuh whose feckless hands they bound.
He begged for quarter, saying: ‘‘ Famous king!
Why wish to shed my blood ? Compassionate
My luckless fortune. Slay me not that I
May run before thee and approve myself
Thy wretched mendicant.”’

VOL. VIII. U

Google

C. 1944
<pb n="306"/>
C. 1945

306 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Bahram Chubina
Replied: “ I would not carry from the field
Of fight such men as thee. I will not sever
Thy head because I shame at having fought
A cavalier like thee. When thou art set
At liberty be off with you and tell
Khusrau Parwiz what thou hast seen of me.”’

Nastuh, on hearing, kissed the ground and gave

Abundant thanks. This done, Bahram Chubina
Departed with his warriors good at need
To Rai, reposed, then sought the Khan with speed.

§ 28

How Khusrau Parwiz pillaged the Camp of Bahrém
Chibina and wrote a _ Letter to Caesar who
answered it with a Robe of Honour and Gijts

Khusrau Parwiz on his side visited

Bahram Chubina’s lines and pillaged them,

Bestowing on his soldiers purse and crown.

He mounted a fleet steed and girt himself

For prayer. Before him was a bramble-brake.

He entered that befitting place afoot,

And wallowed in the dust before his God.

‘“*O righteous Judge !”’ he said, ‘* Thou hast delivered

The country from the burden of the foe,

And hast surpassed our whole imaginings.

I am thy worshipper and worthless slave :

I walk according to the Lord’s command.”
Thence he returned to camp; his counsellors

Assembled, and he called a scribe to write

A letter out on silk from Shah to Cesar,

Detailing what had passed in that campaign.

Google
<pb n="307"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 307

He first praised God—the Source of manliness,
Of prowess, and success, then said: “In secret
Much hath God favoured me. I and my host
Came to Azargashasp. I hurried onward,
Returning for the fight. Bahram Chiubina
So pressed me that I had not room to strive ;
But when all-holy God ceased to assist
My foe the flaming blast of war died out,
And with resources failing and with troops
Deserting he withdrew at break of day.
I have destroyed his whole host, fired his camp,
And intercepted too by God’s behest
His line of march.”
They set upon the letter

The Shah’s seal, and the messengers departing
Bare it to famous Ceesar’s court where he,
Whose fortune was awake, on reading it,
Descended from his throne and cried to God :—
“OQ Guide! Thou changest never. Thou hast made
Thy slave triumphant and restored the outcast.”’

He lavished alms and provand by the ass-load,
And wrote withal an answer like a tree
In Paradise, beginning: ‘‘ In the name
Of God, the Lord of victory, of Grace,
And justice, Lord of moon and sun and might.
Know thou that greatness and good fortune come
From Him, what while thou livest give Him praise,
And in this world in public and in private
Ensue but justice and beneficence.”’

He sent a crown—an heirloom of the Cesars,
Reserved for fit occasions—with a pair
Of earrings and a royal torque, of robes
Eleven hundred broidered all in gold,
A hundred camel-loads of gold dinars,
As well as many pearls and precious stones,
A jewelled cross and throne all royal gems,

Google

C.

1946
<pb n="308"/>
308 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

A green robe shot with gold whereof the fringe
Was finished off with jewels. With the gifts
And offerings went four philosophers
Of those of Rum. Khusrau Parwiz dispatched
A thousand cavaliers of noble birth
To meet and welcome them. Those magnates
reached

With their new gifts Khusrau Parwiz in safety,
Who, having viewed them and perused the letter,
Was lost in wonder at that wealth and said
To his own minister: ‘* These robes of Rum,
Adorned with jewelry are not the wear
Of wealthy thanes but Christian priests! If we
Have Crosses on our dress we shall conform
To Christian fashion. If I wear them not
"Twill anger Cesar who will of a truth
Misconstrue me, while if I put them on
The magnates all will say: “ This king of men
Perchance hath turned a Christian for wealth’s sake,
Because he is all Cross.

His counsellor
Replied: “‘O Shah! clothes constitute not Faith.
Though Cesar be thy kin thy Faith is still
That of Zarduhsht, the Prophet.”

Then he donned

Those royal robes, hung up the jewelled crown,
Bade raise the curtain, and bring in the envoys.
Both Rumans and [Iranians crowded in
Without distinction. When the sages saw
The Shah’s attire they knew that he desired
To pleasure Cesar, others said that he
Had of a truth turned Christian privily.

Google
<pb n="309"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 309

§ 29

How Niydtuis was wroth with Bandwi and how Maryam
made Peace between them

Next day Khusrau Parwiz prepared his throne,
And donned his crown of state. The festal board
Was spread within the rosary. “ Invite,”
He said, ‘“‘ the Rumans.”’

Niyatus arrived
With the other Rumans and they took their seats
Before the board with the philosophers.
Now when Khusrau Parwiz came from his throne
Of audience in the jewelled robes from Rum,
Advanced with smiles and sat down at the board,
Bandwi came quickly, sacred twigs in hand.
The world-lord took them with intent to join
The other nobles in their muttered prayers,?
While Niyatus, on seeing that, threw down
His bread and all disordered left the board,
Exclaiming: ‘‘ Muttered prayer and Cross at once
Insulteth Christ through Cesar ! ”’

Seeing this
Bandwi, still at the board, back-handed smote
That servant of the Cross upon the face.
Khusrau Parwiz was grieved, beholding this ;
His cheeks grew like the flower of fenugreek.
He said to Gustaham: “ This valiant fool
Should wrangle not when drinking. What hath he
To do with Ruman Niyatus ? He recked not
His person in this quarrel.”’
Niyatus,

Departing, mounted and returned half drunk
To camp. He donned his Ruman mail and thought

1 See Vol. i. p. 80.

Google

C. 1947
<pb n="310"/>
C. 1948

310 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

To mar that feast. The Riman cavaliers,
All eager for the fray, set face to where
Khusrau Parwiz held court, and Niyatus
Sent on a cavalier of Riman race
Withal to go like wind to him and say :—
** Bandwi, the worthless, with a back-hand blow
Smote on the cheek God’s servant. Now if thou
Wilt send him to me—well. If not, expect
A tumult of the folk. Thou wilt writhe more
At me than at the slave! ambitioning
The throne of king of kings.”
Khusrau Parwiz

Was wroth on hearing this. ‘“ None should ignore
The Faith of God,” he said. ‘* From Gaiumart
And from Jamshid to Kai Kubéd none spake
Of Christ, and God forbid that I shall quit
My fathers’ Faith, those world-lords choice and holy,
Adopt the Faith of Christ, and murmur not
A prayer at meals but be a Christian !
If thou wilt take account thou art alone:
I saw of late what Ruman prowess is ! ”’

Then Maryam spake thus to Khusrau Parwiz :—
** I will abate the brawling of these folk.
Commit illustrious Bandwi to me,
So that the Rimans may contemplate him
From head to foot. I will restore him whole.
None ever made a point of senseless strife.”

The king dispatched Bandwi to Niyatus,
Escorted by ten horsemen, with Maryam,
That prudent lady on whose lips good counsel
Ne’er failed. He said: “Approach thy father’s

brother,

And say: ‘ Thou quarrelsome, ill-meaning man !
Hast thou not seen how Cesar hath assisted
The Shah to majesty, hath fought his battles,

1 Bahram Chutbina.

Google
<pb n="311"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 311

Hath made affinity and league with him,
And furnished men and means and hoarded treasures ?
Wilt thou destroy affinity and league,
And take away from me the Grace of Cesar,
Who told thee that the Shah would not abandon
His Faith on his return ? Why speak raw words ?
Now take Bandwi’s head to thy breast and utter
No word ungracious. Give not to the winds
The toil and work of Cesar, and God grant
That thou mayst not recall my words too late.”

She went and spake to that effect. Her cheeks
Were like a rose in bloom, and Niyatus,
Who thought her words of profit, took her counsel.
He pacified his heart about Bandwi,
And shamed on his account, at sight of him
Arose and bade his treasurer bring forth
A noble led horse and received Bandwi
With smiles and welcome, and they visited
The king together. When Khusrau Parwiz
Saw Niyatus he said: “ The heart of one
Of ill condition seeketh not for good.
Bandwi hath ne’er ensued but strife and tumult :
Make not the world both dark and strait to me ;
Give not the toil of Cesar to the wind
In passion; let me have a moment’s jJoy.?
If he hath spoken ill of thy religion
Expect not wisdom from a foolish man.”

‘** Expect not wisdom from a Ruiman drunk,
O Shah!” said Niyatus. ‘* Keep thy sires’ Faith,
For wise men change not such.”’

When in this strain

Much talk had passed he sought his camp again.

1 Two couplets omitted.

Google
<pb n="312"/>
C. 1949

312 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

§ 80

How Khusrau Parwiz gave Presents to Niydtus and the
Rumans, how he dismissed them to Rim, and
wrote Patents for the Nobles of fran

The Shah then bade Kharrad, son of Barzin :—

‘** Hold a review and call a court. Let all

The Ruman troops be mustered, young and old.

Bestow on them two thirds of all my treasures ;

They must feel well content with what we give.”
For all deserving of a robe of honour

By prowess shown in fight he bade make ready

Such, and to requisition splendid steeds

From his own court. He gave to Niyatus

Such jewels, steeds and handmaids girt with gold

That they exceeded measure and surpassed

Withal what potentates were used to give.

All cities taken by Kubad from Rum,

Or captured by Hurmuzd and Niushirwan

Of glorious birth, he gave to Niyatus,

Had patents drawn for them and filled the cup

Of colocynth with honey. Then the Rumans

Set forth for Rum, that prosperous coast and land.

The great Khusrau Parwiz escorted them

Two stages, farewelled Niyatus, and then

Turned back. Next week he took ten cavaliers,

Both shrewd and true to him, and quitting camp

Fared to Azargashasp. On seeing the dome

He lighted down and went afoot, his eyes

All wet, his cheeks sun-yellow. When he passed

The portal and approached the Fire his visage

Was hidden by his tears. There he recited

The Zandavasta for a se’nnight’s space,}

1 Reading with P.

Google
<pb n="313"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 313

And humbly danced attendance on the Fire,
Departing on the eighth day for the feast

Of Sada was at hand. As he had promised
Before his lords he gave his share of spoil,

Of gold and silver, jewel-work, and gems

Fit for a monarch, to the Fire. He gave
Drachms to the poor abundantly and left

No one dissatisfied throughout the land.

He went thence to the country of Andiv

To have his portion in the day of joy:

That province was the salt waste’s boundary,
And none could put a value on the soil.
Within the palace built by Nushirwan, .

Who dwelt there much, he had a splendid suite
Of rooms prepared, the golden throne arrayed,
And then the conquering, God-fearing world-lord
Came and sat down upon his grandsire’s seat,
And bade a scribe and his own minister—

A helpful archimage—attend. They wrote

Out patents for the Iranians as the Great

And Mighty used to do. Bandwi, the chief.
The well advised, the veteran, managed all.
The Shah gave Khurasan to Gustaham,

And bade him reinstate both law and justice,
Assisted by Burzmihr, the experienced scribe
Of beauteous face, and since heaven favoured him
Bestowed by grant Istakhr and Dardabgird.

He set his golden signet on the patent,

Then handed it to Ram Barzin forthwith,

And bade him bear it to Shaptr to whom

He gave withal both slaves and robe of honour.
He bade convey a patent under seal

To Andiyan, as was the royal use,

And gave him all the country of Kirman
Because Khusrau Parwiz esteemed him great.
He gave another province to Gurdwi,

Google

C. 1950
<pb n="314"/>
314 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And sealed the letter with the golden seal.
He gave Balwi the town of Chach and sent
The patent with an ivory throne. He counted
The treasury-keys and to Tukhara’s son
Committed them. The monarch of the world,
This matter ended, turned to folk at large,
And bade the chieftains all obey Kharrdad,
Son of Barzin, whose rule should be world-wide,
And name be countersigned on every patent.
The soldiers all that in the time of action
Held by the famous king were given from him
A robe of honour and dismissed with joy.
A herald fluent and a chief withal
Of sweet voice and shrewd heart went round pro-
claiming :—
‘““O ye, the subjects of the king of earth!
Praise justice only, seek not vengeance, shed
Not blood, and prompt not unto deeds of ill.
If any of our subjects be aggrieved,
Or injured by the troops, the wrongers’ place
Shall be the gibbet here and penal fire
Hereafter. Ye are all lords of the treasure
That cometh to you from your proper toil.
Enjoy and give away, ye that have means !
And ye that have none! ask. In every city
We have a treasure through our fathers’ travail,
Or ours, and we have bidden the treasurer
Give food and clothes withal to such as lack.
C. 1051 When food is requisite they shall receive
From him three mans! at dawn upon condition
That they shall make thanksgiving and shall
strive
To keep the earth in culture.”
Through his justice
The world became a Paradise on high,
1 “trois man de blé.””. Mohl. Cf. Vol. i. p. 200 note.

Google
<pb n="315"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 315

And one may well acclaim Khusrau Parwiz,
For better is a great king of that kind
Than one impure albeit sage in mind.}

§ 31
Firdausi’s Lament for the Death of his Son

At sixty-five ’tis ill to catch at pelf.

Oh! let me read that lesson to myself,

And muse upon the passing of my son.

My turn it was and yet the youth hath gone,

While I for sorrow am as soulless clay.

I will make haste, perchance o’ertake, and say

Reproachfully : “‘ My turn it was to go;

Why hast thou gone then ’gainst my will and so

Robbed me of all my peace ? Thou didst abate

My cares; why hast thou left thine agéd mate ?

Didst thou perchance find younger company

That lightly thus thou hast abandoned me ? ”
Seven years and thirty o’er the youth had sped

When he distasted of the world and fied.

Harsh comrade proved he of my pilgrimage,

And, having turned his back on me in rage,

Went, but he left me his calamities,

His griefs, a full heart, and blood-weeping eyes.

Now whither he hath passed he doth aspire

To choose a habitation for his sire

In Light. Since then a weary time hath gone,

And of his way-mates hath returned not one.

Good sooth! he looketh for me wrathfully

Because I loiter. Five and sixty I,

He thirty-seven. He asked not agéd me,

1 In the above passage the last couplet of the section is read witb
P. before the two preceding ones.

Google
<pb n="316"/>
316 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

But hurried off alone. I stayed to see

The outcome of my labours. May God grace

Thy soul with light and wisdom’s breastplate place
Before thy life. It is my prayer that He,

Who giveth all and ruleth righteously,

The Holy, will forgive each fault of thine,

And cause thy moon now overcast to shine.

§ 32
The Story of Bahrém Chibina and the Khan of Chin

C. 1952 Tell now old tales, tell of Bahram Chubina.
When he drew near the country of the Turks,
Toward the Lions and the Khan, there went
Ten thousand shrewd and wary cavaliers,

Led by the son and brother of the Khan,

Each with a priest as counsellor, to meet him.
On reaching the Khan’s throne Bahram Chubina
Gave praises to him and did reverence.

The Khan, upon beholding hin, rose, kissed,
And stroked caressingly, his face, inquiring

At large about the travail of the way,

And of his warfare with the Shah and host,
Then gave a welcome to Izid Gashasp

Withal and to Yalan-sina—those chiefs

No longer hostile. When Bahram Chubina

Was seated on the silvern throne he took

In his the Khan’s hand, saying: “ Glorious prince,
The captain and ruler of the Turks

Of Chin! thou know’st that no one is secure
Within the world by reason of malign

Khusrau Parwiz who vexeth those that fain
Would rest from toil and doubleth it for those

Google
<pb n="317"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 317

That live at ease. If now thou wilt accept me,

And be mine aid in good and evil, I

Will be thy comrade in this priceless land,

And friend in good and ill, while shouldst thou suffer
Through me I will depart and seek a cistern
Elsewhere, and if thou wilt have none of me

Then I will journey unto Hindustan.”

The Khan said: “ Noble chieftain ! never mayst
Thou need that day. Like mine own kin will I
Hold thee. My kin? Nay, better than my child.
My whole land will co-operate with me
Herein, both lord and liege. Pre-eminence
I give thee o’er my chiefs and furthermore
I make thee independent of my lords.”

Bahram Chubina further asked an oath
To bind his soul, for so far all was tongue.

The Khan said: “‘ By the most high God, the Guide
Of me and thee, I am thy mate indeed,

What while I live, and friend for good and ill.”’

Thereafter they prepared two palaces,

And furnished them with vessels of all kinds.

Slaves, food, and raiment, needful carpeting,

With serviceable plate of gold and silver,

Dinars and royal jewelry, the Khan

Sent to Bahram Chubina whose dark soul

Grew bright, and save with whom the Khan went not
To polo, the assembly, and the chase,

Remaining in this mind and lauding him.

The Khan possessed a chief who was his friend,
His help in war and of a stronger nature,!

Named Makatura, by whose means the Khan
Had won success and fame. He used to visit
The Khan at dawn with fingers on his lips,
For thus did subjects offer reverence,
To those illustrious potentates of Chin,

* “‘un homme de plus haute naissance que le prince.’’ Mohl.

Google

C. 1953
<pb n="318"/>
318 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And each time from the veteran monarch’s treasure
Would carry fifty score dinars away.

Bahram Chubina marked this for a while,
Astonied at the Khan, then laughed and said

One day: “ Exalted one! thou art esteemed
Among the potentates, yet every morn

At audience-time this Turk thus beareth off

These fifty score dinars! If he receiveth

A mine ’tis not for rendered services,}

The Khan replied: “ This is a way of ours—
The glory of our Faith—that all our bravest,
And stanchest on the day of stress, should meet
With no refusal when they ask for more,

And plead with importunity. His power
Is more than mine. I charm him with dinars.
If I refused the troops would mutiny,
And dim my shining day.”

Bahram Chubina,
The world-aspirant, said: ‘ O king of men!
Thou hast made him a master o’er thyself.
When world-lords are both valiant and alert
They must not let a subject have the reins.
If I should rid thee of him wouldst thou be
Well pleased or dost thou care for his support ? ”’

***Tis thine to order this,”’ replied the Khan,
** And thine to plan and compass this desire.
If thou canst free me from him thou wilt bring
The question to an end.”

** To-morrow morn,”’
He made reply, ‘“‘ when Makatura cometh
For his dinars, smile not, regard him not,
And answer not or, if at all, in wrath.”

That night passed and at dawn came Makatura
Before the Khan. That world-lord neither saw him,

Que ce soit un cadeau, que ce soit sa paye, faut-il donc que
sa part soit tout l’or d’une mine ?’ d.

Google
<pb n="319"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 319

Nor heard what that bold Turk had got to say,
Who, angered, raged and glared at him, and cried :—
“Why is it that to-day I have grown vile,
My lord? Assuredly this Persian prince,
Who reached our land with thirty friends, is striving
To turn thee from the right and would consign
Thine army to the wind.”’
Bahram Chubina
Replied: ‘‘O warrior! why so fierce in talk ?
J, if the Khan will follow mine advice,
And prudently regard our covenant,
Will let not thee come hither every morn
To waste his treasures with impunity.
Thou mayest be three hundred cavaliers,
And hunt the Lions on the battlefield ;
It followeth not that thou each morn shouldst come,
And claim dinars by ass-loads from the king.”’
When Makatutra heard his head became

All vengeful at Bahram Chubina’s scheme.
In wrath and passion he put forth his hand,
And plucked a poplar arrow from his quiver.
‘“* This is my token and interpreter
In battle,’? said he to Bahram Chubina,
** So look out for my point when thou shalt come
To court to-morrow morn.”

On hearing this
Bahram Chubina, growing mettlesome,
Gave him a poplar arrow tipped with steel,
And said: “ Receive this keepsake and observe
Its usefulness.”

Then Makatura went
Forth from the Khan and hurried to his tent.

Google

C. 1954
<pb n="320"/>
- 320 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

§ 33
How Makdtira was slain by Bahrédm Chibina

When night withdrew its sombre skirt, and dawn
Brake o’er the gloomy mountains, Makatura
Put on his battle-armour and went forth,
Turadnian sword in hand. Bahram Chubina,
On hearing, called for steed and royal breastplate.
The spot they chose was one whose plain and waste
No leopards e’er resorted to for fight.
The Khan, on hearing, mounted on his steed,
And went accompanied by the loyal Turks
To see which raging Lion of the twain
Would have the better fortune. Makatura,
On coming to the scene of strife, dispatched
Dust cloudward from the plain and shouted thus
To haught Bahram Chubina: ‘‘ What hast thou
To say of manhood now ? Wilt thou begin,
Or shall the loyal, lion-hearted Turk ? ”’
Bahram Chubina said: ‘ Begin thyself,
For thou didst start this quarrel by thy words.”’
Then Makatura called on God and strung
C. 1955 His bow, grasped joyfully the string and arrow,
Drew to the point and then released his thumb.
He struck the cavalier upon the belt,
But that bright iron point pierced not the mail.
Bahram Chubina held aloof awhile
That Makatura might grow tired of fight,
Who, thinking that his enemy was shent,
Turned shouting from the field.
‘**O warrior !”
Bahram Chubina cried, “‘ thou hast not slain me;
Depart not to thy tent. Thy say is said;
Stop and hear my reply and, if thou livest

Google

<pb n="321"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 321

When thou hast heard it, go.”

With that he chose
A breastplace-piercing shaft of poplar-wood,
One to which stone and iron were as wax,
And hit the valiant horseman on the girdle.
That chief grew satiate of dinars and fight,
And wept and slept upon his bast-bound saddle,
For he, on mounting for the fray, had tied
His two feet to the saddle and thus kept
His seat though wounded, while his wounder rode
Up to the Khan and said: ‘“ Imperious !
Yon noble needeth one to dig his grave.”’

The Khan said: ‘‘ Look more closely. He is
swooning,
But living on the saddle.”
Thus replied

Bahram Chubfna: ‘“ Puissant sovereign !
His body cometh even now to dust.
May all thy foemen swoon as he is swooning
On his Turanian steed.”

The valiant Khan
Dispatched a cavalier to that famed Lion,
Whom they saw bound, slain vilely, and released
From fate’s vicissitudes. The Khan thereat
Laughed to himself in secret, wondering
At that chief horseman of the world’s exploit ;
Then full of thought returned to his own palace
With crown that soared to Saturn in his joy.
He called for arms and drachms, for steeds and slaves,
Gemmed trinketry, imperial crown, dinars,
King-worthy jewels, and all kinds of gear
Of war. These from the Khan a messenger
Bare to Bahram Chubina’s treasurer.

VOL. VITI. x

Google
<pb n="322"/>
C. 1956

322 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

§ 34
How the Lion-ape slew a Daughter of the Khan, how tt

was slain by Bahram Chibina, and how the Khan
gave him a Daughter and the Kingdom of Chin

Time passed and peace was tutor night and day.
There were at that time in the hills of Chin

Wild animals past count. One was a beast
Out-bulking horses and upon its head

Were two black locks like cables. It was tawny
Of body while its ears and throat were black.
None saw it save at noon-tide and it had

Two claws resembling those of mighty lions.

Its roar rose o’er the clouds, it swallowed stones,
And turned the day of mighty men to gloom.

Folk called it “ Lion-ape: ”! the land was all
Confounded at the ill it wrought. The Khan
Possessed a moon-like daughter, had the moon
Two raven locks, two rubious lips, a nose

As ’twere a silvern reed, two smiling cheeks?

Of coral, and dark eyes. Her parents used

To weep for terror lest the sun should strike her.
One day she went forth to the plain and roamed
The meadows while the Khan, the world-lord, followed
The chase elsewhere. The queen was in the palace
Engaged in converse with a counsellor.

Thus went her daughter to that meadow-land
With other damsels, wine, and revellers.

The lion-ape descried her from the heights,
Descended to the plain and gulped her down :°
That fair-cheeked damsel ended in a breath.

The Khan heard and his face turned black, his queen

1“ Sher-kappf ”’ which Mohl translates ‘le lion Keppi.”’
* “deux levres ’’ (Mohl) but they have just been mentioned.
> Cf. Vol. v, p. 233 and note.

Google
<pb n="323"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 323

Tore out her hair: they mourned the maid for years,
As if they had been burning in fierce flames,
And sought to slay the monster and relieve
Chin from that stress. Now when Bahram Chubina
Fought with and sent the dust from Makatura
The queen went forth to watch him and discoursed
To all about his prowess. Meeting him
One day with five score nobles of Iran,
And many men on foot preceding him,
While he rode with a counsellor, she asked :—
** Who Is this with such height and Grace divine ? ”’

A servant answered: ‘“* Thou hast much to learn,
Not knowing brave Bahram Chubina’s name !
He once was Shah within Iran; his crown,
Out-topped the moon. Chiefs title him * Bahram
The brave,’ for he hath borne the fame of valour
From other kings, and now that he hath quitted
fran for Chin earth quaketh ’neath his charger.
Our sovereign would have him for a chief,
So setteth on his head a royal crown.”

She thus made answer: “ Since his Grace is such
Well may we nestle underneath his wings,
And well may I request a boon of him ;
He will not act with slackness like the Khan,
But venge me on the monster when he heareth
The reason for my grief and malisons.”

He answered: “If the queen of upright folk
Will speak to him she will not find a trace
Left of the hon-ape except a corpse
Dragged by the feet by wolves.”

She heard and joyed:

Pain for her daughter left her. She made haste
To sce the Khan and tell him all. He said :—
‘* Where there is horseman such as I, and where
A lion-ape hath battened on my child,
’T were shame for us to tell it; "twould disgrace

Google

C. 1957
<pb n="324"/>
324 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

My stock. Bahram Chubina knoweth not
That that terrific monster will make budge
An iron mountian with its breath. Although
The daughter of a king be famed life too
Is dear to him.”
She said: “‘I want revenge

For her who was mine Eye, so speak I will,
Shame or no shame, and haply gain mine end.”

Much time thus passed away. She kept her rancour
A secret. Now the Khan chanced to prepare
A feast and summoned thereunto his chiefs.
He sent and called the brave Bahram Chubina,
And seated him upon the silvern throne.
Now when the queen behind her curtains heard
She entered quickly, saw the hero, praised
And blessed him much, and said to him: ‘‘ May Chin
And Turkistan be prosperous through thee !
Fain would I ask a favour of my lord ;
May he accord it me.”

He said: “Tis thine

To order and to will and win thy wish.”

She said: ‘* Near by there is a meadow-land—
The very spot for feasting—and therein
The youths of Chin keep merrymake each Spring.
A bow-shot past the wood thou mayst behold
A mount more black than pitch. Upon that mount
Of flint there is a monster, and the realm
Of Chin is in distress because of it.
A lion-ape I term it for I know not
What else to call it. By the Khan I had
A daughter whom the sun was wont to praise.
She left the palace for that feasting-place
What while the Khan was hunting with his men.
Came from the mountain that ferocious monster,
And gulped down her that was our very Eye.
Now every Spring it visiteth that meadow

Google
<pb n="325"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 325

In quest of prey. No youth or paladin

Of any name is left in this our city

Since through the mischief of this lion-ape

They have been slaughtered, and it hath sent up

The dust from this fair land. Our cavaliers

Of war and men of action have gone forth

In numbers to that mountain-height but when

They see afar the monster’s claws and breast,

Its back, its shoulders, ears and head, it roareth

And shattereth those warriors’ hearts, for what

Are lions, tigers, crocodiles thereto ?

No counter of the cost will venture near.”
Bahram Chubina said: “ At dawn to-morrow

I will go forth and view this pleasure-ground,

And by the strength and might that God hath given,

‘The exalted Fashioner of sun and moon,

I will relieve the pleasance of this monster

If some will guide me thither when ’tis dawn.”
Whenas the moon’s disk shone forth from the sky,

And dark night shook abroad its dusky locks,

They broke up and departed on their ways,

Bemused, each to his palace. When the glory

Of golden Sol appeared and plaited up

Night’s azure tresses, brave Bahram Chubina

Put on his gambeson and then committed

His honoured form to God. He took his lasso,

His bow, a hundred shafts and one forked dart

As used in hunting. When he neared the height

He bade his retinue turn back, and when

Hard on the lion-ape thou wouldst have said :

‘“The mount loured o’er him.” There mid rocks of

flint

He girt himself and mounted on his saddle,

Armed with his coiled up lasso, plied his bow

And strung it, called on God who giveth good,

Sent up his battle-cry, and smote the rocks

Google

C. 1958
<pb n="326"/>
C. 1959

326 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Until they flashed again. The hon-ape

Was in a pool. It wallowed and came forth,

For when the monster's fell was soaked no shaft

Availed against it. That grim monster came

To gulp Bahram Chubina down. That hero

Shot and the body of the hion-ape

Had fight enough. He shot again and smote

The monster on the head; the blood poured down

Like water o'er its breast. He marked the strength

And onset of the monster, shot again,

Transfixed its claw, then loosed his lasso, leapt

Upon that lofty mountain-top and speared

The creature's loins ; the flints were dyed with blood.

Then reaching for his scimitar he clave

The monster’s form in twain, cut off its head,

And flung it down contemptuously, descended,

Came to the Khan, rejoicing, and proclaimed

What had befallen the ape. The Khan and queen

Set forward to the wood and made all haste

To reach the mountain-top while acclamation,

Such that thou wouldst have said: ‘“ The earth is
rent ”’

Rose from the warriors of Chin. They praised

Bahram Chubina and showered gold and jewels

Abundantly upon him while the chief

Of Chin embraced him and bestowed on him

Thenceforth the style of king, and having reached

The palace chose a trusty messenger,

And sent a hundred purses full of drachms,

With slaves and robes, and bade a scribe attend.

They wrote a patent out for Chin on silk.

The Khan at that time gave Bahram Chubina

His daughter to secure his staying there.

As was their custom they made ready robes

Of honour, many crowns and belts. The Khan

Said to Bahram Chubina: ‘“ These bestow

Google
<pb n="327"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 327

On such fradnians as are worthy of them.”
Bahram Chubina took to feast and chase,

Untroubled by the passing on of time ;

The noblest of the cavaliers of Chin

Were his petitioners, and all Chin said :—

‘** We are thy slaves and only live for thee,”

While he mid feast and largess passed his days,

And all folk too united in his praise.

§ 35

How Khusrau Parwiz heard of the Case of Bahram
Chibina and wrote a Letter to the Khan, and
how he replied

Thus matters fared till tidings reached fran,
Reached the great monarch of the brave: “ A king-
ship

And treasure greater than thine own are now
Bahram Chubina’s and untoiled for! ”’

Vexed
And troubled by solicitude, his heart
Wrung by the doings of Bahram Chubina,
He held consult with his own magnates, spake,
Discussing all expedients, and at night
Called for a scribe and made an arrow-head
His pen-point. To the Khan of Chin he wrote
A letter, and thou wouldst have said: ‘‘ He made
His sword the pen.”’

He first praised God, “ the One,

The Guide to good, who setteth up on high
Sun, moon, and Saturn, who enthroneth kings,
Who pricketh sinners and increaseth Grace.
By ignorance, by knowledge, by uprightness,

Google

C. 1960
<pb n="328"/>
328 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And by perversity, by harm and loss,
’*Tis owned that He is One and hath no comrade,
No peer, no mate. Whoever seeketh good
Shall find it but so may not he whose hands
Are steeped in ill, and he that maketh choice
Of God’s way must forgo ingratitude.”’

He then said thus: ‘* Bahram Chubina (may
He ne’er in this world see his wishes won !)
Was an ungrateful servant to the Shah,
Ignoring both his master and his God.
He was of small account, unfamed and weak,
Till my sire took him up when season served ;
But when the monarch of the world thus raised him
He only did according to his nature :
His conduct is well known to great and small.
The mighty and the wise rejected him,
But thou didst welcome him when he arrived,
And take him by the hand as one well born—
A thing incredible to upright folk,
And not approved by me. Thou hast forgotten
Perchance his conduct when thou went’st in fear
Because of him. He lashed thee many times
Upon the head—a thing that none commend.!
Thou shouldest not make barren thine own fame,
And barter thy tranquillity to him.
When they deliver this let thine advice,
Now dark, consider well if thou wilt profit
By sending us that slave, his feet in fetters ;
Else I dispatch an army from fran,
And for Turan turn daylight into gloom.”

Now when the letter reached the Khan, and he
Had heard the intention of Khusrau Parwiz,
He told the envoy: ‘‘ When thou com’st to court
To-morrow morning ask for the reply.”

The envoy came in haste; he had not slept

1 See p. I44.

Google
<pb n="329"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 329

All night. He waited till he saw the Torch
Resplendent of the sun, then made all haste
To have an audience of the Khan who sent
For scribe with pen and ink and silk of Chin,
And wrote in answer: “ To the Maker be
Such praise as magnates give from me, a slave,”
Proceeding thus: ‘ Thy letter I have read,
And set the messenger before me. Speak
Thou unto slaves expressions such as thine.
It fitteth not thine ancient family
To disallow the greatness 6f the great,
Or not to make the lowly know his place.
Mine are the whole of Chin and of Turan,
_ And the Haitalian crown. I ne’er broke faith ;
Suggest it not. To break my pledge when I
Have ta’en Bahram Chubina by the hand
Will make men call me base-born. I fear none
Save holy God, but as for thee -if greatness
_ Increase with thee so also should thy wisdom.”

He set his seal thereto and told the envoy :—
‘** Companion with the wind.”

Within a month

The envoy reached the Shah who when he read
The letter writhed and was in fear of fortune.
He called the [rdnians, told the Khan’s reply,
And showed the letter, and the Great, when they
Had read it, mused. He gat from them this answer :—
**O glory of the throne and crown of kings !
Weigh these things well; consult some ancient sage ;
Let not this letter make thee rash; turn not
The torch of former Grace to gloom; select
Some old Iranian sage, wise, eloquent,
A warrior and a scribe, and let him go
Hence to the Khan to speak and hear his views,
Inform him what Bahram Chubina was
At first and, after, to what ends he used

Google

C. 1961
<pb n="330"/>
196%
C..10902_.

330 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

His leadership, and having ordered all
Was fain to make a bondslave of his lord.
If this be not accomplished in one month
Then let the envoy stay a year forwhy
"Twill not be easy to disparage him
Because he is the Khan’s own son-in-law.
The envoy must be very plausible,

And none must gather what his purpose 1s.”
Thereafter brave Bahram Chubina, hearing
That some one from [ran had brought the Khan

A letter, went to him forthwith and said :—

‘““ My gracious lord! I hear yon recreant knave
Is plying thee with letters. Choose from Chin
A gallant host and occupy fran.

My scimitar shall conquer it and Rum ;

I will salute thee monarch of those lands,

And there the watchmen of the night shall have
Thy name upon their lips. I will behead
Inglorious Khusrau Parwiz, and may

No top or toe be left him! I took service
That I might root out the Sasanians.”’

The Khan, on hearing, pondered and his heart
Was like a wood with thoughts. He summoned all
The elders—eloquent, learned, heedful men—
Told them Bahrim Chubina’s scheme, revealed
What had been secretly proposed and gat
This answer from the men of lore, alike
From those of his own kin and alien :—

‘“*°*Tis no light task, but hard, to consummate
The measure of the lineage of Sasan ;

Yet if Bahram Chubina shall march forth,

And show the wise the way, he in fran

Will find full many a friend since he will have
The Khan to back and help him, and thy fortune
Soon will achieve the work. We ought to listen
To what he saith.”

Google
<pb n="331"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 331

Bahram Chubina’s heart
Revived when this he heard ; he laughed and changed
In bearing. All the warriors agreed
That they must choose two young men who were fit
To have command, inured to toil and soldiers.
There was in Chin a noble named Chinwi,
And one Zhangwi—a chief. The Khan sent, sum-
moned,
And made those men of war his paymasters.
He bade them both: “ Be circumspect in fight,
And ever look up to Bahram Chubina
Alike in times of joyance and of wrath,
Secure the fords of the Jihun and send it
In dust up to the sky.”
He gave to them
A valiant host—all chiefs and warrior-lions.
Drums sounded at Bahram Chubina’s portal,
And Sol’s face changed to ebony with dust.
From Chin toward [ran he took his way
Upon Sapandarmad at break of day.

§ 36

How Khusrau Parwiz sent Kharrdd, Son of Barzin, to
the Khén and how he schemed to slay Bahrdm Chibina

Now when the great king heard: ‘“ The wolf hath
come

Outside the wood, and bold Bahram Chubina

Hath brought a host that robbeth heaven of lustre,”

He said thus to Kharrad, son of Barzin :—

‘“Go to the Khan upon this business.

Thou art acquainted best both with fran

And with Turan, and with their divers tongues.”

Google
<pb n="332"/>
C. 1963

332 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

He oped his treasury and brought forth such jewels,
Such scimitars and golden belts, as made
Kharrad astound and secretly invoke
The name of God. With these he left for Chin,
Crossed the Jihtn and took unwonted paths,
Neared the Shah’s palace, looked around and chose
One to announce: “ An envoy from the Shih
Hath come to court.”
The Khan, on hearing this,
Prepared his throne and bade admit the envoy
Who, as he drew anear, made eloquent
His tongue and did obeisance, saying: “ Thy slave
Will frame his tongue to speak at thy command.”
The Khan replied: “ A sweet tongue maketh young
The heart of eld. Speak words of profit; they
Are pith when spoken but, unspoken, peel.”
Thereat Kharrad recalled old tales and first
Praised the Creator, who controlleth fortune,
The Almighty and the Lord of fate, who made
** Sky, earth, and time, high heaven and the world,
Who hath all power of right while we are slaves,
And tell his righteous acts. To one He giveth
The crown and lofty throne, another one
He maketh vile, afflicted, and cast down,
Not that He loveth this and hateth that,
But why He only knoweth. We, both great
And small, are born but to return to dust,
And have perforce resigned to death our bodies.
Begin we with pre-eminent Jamshid,
Or with the glorious world-lord Tahmuras,
And thus pass on to Kai Kubad and all
The Great that we remember—Kai Khusrau,
The famous Rustam and by that same token
Continue till we reach Asfandiyar.
Their share of this world was the charnel-house ;
They have drunk bane instead of antidote.

Google
<pb n="333"/>
- KHUSRAU PARWIZ 333

Our present Shah is of thy kin; he joyeth
And sorroweth as thou dost wax and wane.
His great-grandsire upon the mother’s side,
When glorious Shahs held sway, was Khan of Chin.
Now in these latter days our covenant
Hath been renewed and everything is changed.
May He that giveth victory bless thee,
And be thine earth compact of heads of kings.”
He spake. The Khan gave ear and answered
him :—
“© trafficker in lore! if in fran
Be one like thee he knoweth well the sky ! ”

The Khan assigned him lodging in the palace,
And seat anear the throne, then bade him bring
The gifts and give all to the treasurer.

The Khan said: “ Mayst thou lack not worldly wealth.
If thou wilt take a present of me speak
That I too may accept what thou hast brought,
But if not thou art brighter than a gift—
The crown of chiefs in knowledge.”

They prepared
For him a pleasant dwelling-place and draped it
With stuff of every kind. At board and chase,
At feast and drinking-bout this favourite
Was with the Khan, sought an occasion, found him
One day at leisure and made bold to say :—
‘* BahrAm Chubina is a miscreant,
Worse than malicious Ahriman, and selleth
Men veteran for what it were not worth
A mite to mention. King Hurmuzd was first
To bring him forward, raising him by favour
Above the sun. Not one knew e’en his name,
And yet his will hath everywhere prevailed !
Although he doth thee many a kindly office,
Yet will he break faith with thee in the end
As with the Shahs he did, regarding neither

Google

C. 1964
<pb n="334"/>
C. 1965

334 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSTI

The Shah nor God. If to the Shah thou wilt
Dispatch him thou wilt raise up to the moon
The franian monarch’s head. Thenceforth fran
And all Chin are thine own and thou mayst dwell
Where’er thou wilt.”’
The Khan was stunned to hear

Such talk, regarded him with louring eves,
And said to him: ‘“ Speak not such words as these,
For thou wilt blacken our regard for thee.
I am no miscreant and treaty-breaker
Because the shroud of such must be the dust.”’

Kharrad, son of Barzin, on hearing that,
Knew that his novelty was out of date,}
And made reply: “ O thou of royal race !
Why dost thou think to speak such words ? The Shah
Is better than Bahram Chubina is
For thee because of old relationship.”

The Khan rejoined : “ I will make plain my purpose:
If Cesar broke his covenant by making
Agreement with Khusrau Parwiz shall I
Do likewise and act treacherously against
The brave Bahram Chubina ? I possess
A thousand slaves such as Khusrau and come
Of an illustrious race. The king of Rim
Did not oppress thy Shah but gave him treasure
Land and a host. Since brave Bahram Chubina,
Whose gests are written in the chronicles,

Is my supporter and my son-in-law
How can I draw back from my covenant ? ”

Again Kharrdd was foiled and took to guile.
He thought: ‘ The Khan is not concerned for us,
Because Bahram Chubina hath suggested
fran to him. My words are willow’s fruit.”

In black despair about the Khan he turned,

He had no choice, toward the queen and sought

' The remainder of this page in C, should perhaps be omitted.

Google
<pb n="335"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 335

Among her suite one that could cheer his soul.
He found a steward and was privy with him,
Recounted what Khusrau Parwiz had said,
And made that wretch’s heart rejoice, then added :—
“* Speak for me to the queen that I may be
Her scribe.”
The crafty steward answered him :—
“That will not serve because Bahram Chubina
Is now her son-in-law; she is his brains
And skin. Thou art a scribe; contrive some scheme ;
Moreover let not thy design get wind.”
Kharrdad, son of Barzin, on hearing this,
Discerned no top or bottom to his cares.
There was an agéd Turkman, named Kulitin,
Whom other Turkmans scorned. He dressed in sheep-
skin,
And lived withal on millet.1. Makatura
Was of his kindred, so he railed against
Bahram Chubina, ever cherishing
Revenge at heart and cursing him.? Kharrad
Sent to invite Kulun to his famed mansion,
Gave him dinars and drachms, clothes, much to eat,
Invited him to feasts and seated him
Among the chiefs. Kharrad, exceeding wise
And patient-hearted, clever and expert,
Mused much, consulting on one hand the steward
About the queen of Chin but held his peace
When, day or night, he visited the Khan.
The agéd steward spake thus to Kharrad :—
‘* A man like thee, a noble and a scribe,
If he had skill and was of fame in leechcraft,
Would be a crown upon my lady’s head,
And all the more so as her daughter aileth.”’
Kharrad replied: ‘ I have that knowledge too,

» On millet bread—a sign of poverty. Cf. p. 337.
* Two couplets omitted.

Google
<pb n="336"/>
C. 1966

336 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!

And, as thou say’st, will take the case in hand.”’
The steward hastened to the queen and said :—

‘* A learned leech hath arrived.”

** Live and enjoy,”
She answered. “Scratch not thou thy head but

bring him.”
He went and told Kharrad, son of Barzin :—
‘* Preserve thy secret, go announce thyself,
And act the cheerful leech.”’
That schemer went
Before the queen and found the patient’s liver
Disordered. He prescribed pomegranate-juice,
And therewithal a herb that flourisheth
Beside a stream; folk call it chicory.
He sought to stay the aching of her head.
Within a week, for God so ordered it,
The girl grew like the world-enlightening moon.
The queen brought from her treasury dinars,
A purseful, and five gold-embroidered robes,
And said: ‘“‘ Take this unworthy recompense,
And ask what more thou wilt.”
He said: ‘‘ Keep these,

And I will ask my guerdon when I please.’

§ 37
How Bahrédm Chibina was slain by Kulun as Kharrdd,

Son of Barzin, had planned

Bahram Chubina, for his part, arrayed

His army like a pheasant’s wing and marched

To Marv. Then one came to the Khan to say :—
‘“‘ Let none pass to fran from Turkistaén

* There is no break here in the original.

Google

™ ~Zinee

<pb n="337"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 337

Or Chin to tell Khusrau Parwiz about us,
And make a gift to him of our designs.”
The Khan proclaimed: “If one go to fran
Without our seal him will I cleave asunder,
And money shall not buy him off, by God!”
Kharrad, son of Barzin, abode two months,
Intent on his close schemes. Then in concern |
He called Kulin, gave him the seat of honour
One day and said to him: “ None is exempt
From secret sorrow in this world. Thou oft
Hast begged for millet, barley-bread, and sheepskins
From all in Chin, but now thy food is bread
And lamb, and thou art richly clad withal.
Contrast thy present with thy past estate,
Past malisons with present benisons.
Thine years have reached a hundred or at least
Are great in sum. I have a dread emprise
For thee whereby thou mayest gain a throne,
Or darksome dust. I will obtain for thee
An impress from the signet of the Khan ;
Then speed as though thou wouldst roll up the earth.
Thou must get access to Bahram Chubina,
And bide thy time at Marv. Don thy black sheep-
skin,
Provide a knife, and go. Note heedfully
The twentieth! of the month and on that day
Approach this man world-famous for he holdeth
That day ill-omened as I have observed
For many a year. He will admit not then
The public and wear but brocade of Rum.
Say: ° From the daughter of the Khan I bring
The mighty chief a message.’ Keep thy knife
Unsheathed within thy sleeve till he shall bid thee
Approach alone and as thou dost say thus :—
‘The noble lady said: ‘“‘ When thou dost tell

1 “ The day Bahram ’’ in the original.
VOL. VIII. ¥

Google

C. 1967
<pb n="338"/>
338 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

The secret in his ear hide it from others.” ’
When he shall say: ‘ What is the secret ? Tell me,’
Approach him quickly, slit his navel, rise,
And seek to flee. All those that hear his cry
Will hurry from the chieftain to the stalls ;
This one will go for steeds and that for treasure,
And thou wilt suffer not for slaying him.
If they slay thee . . . well thou hast seen the world,
And hast approved its weal and woe. Besides
Thou wilt have had revenge and done what use
Enjoineth,} but indeed none will concern
Himself about thee at that time to harm thee,
While if thou scapest slaying thou hast bought
The world and paid for it, the conquering Shah
Will give to thee a city and withal
A share in this world.’”?
To that sage Kulun

Made answer: “ Need I any further guide ?
Good sooth! although I am a hundred I
Fain would get somewhat so I have no choice.
Be both my body and my soul thy ransom,
Such is the covenant I make with thee.”’

Kharrad, son of Barzin, on hearing that,
Sped to the queen and said: ‘“ The time hath come
For me to ask my boon, O gracious lady !
And I will tell it. Certain of my folk
Across the river are in bonds. Be pleased
To set mine own feet free. Procure for me
An impress of the Khan’s seal and this know
That by so doing thou wilt give me life.”

She said: ‘“‘ He is asleep and drunk: I might
Put clay upon the signet on his hand.”

She asked Kharrad, son of Barzin, for seal-clay,
Went to that drunken sleeper’s couch forthwith
From her apartments, presently impressed

1 Cf. p. 335. * In C. the new section begins here.

Google
<pb n="339"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 339

The clay upon the signet, came, and gave it
To her petitioner. That scribe gave thanks
Therefor, then went and passed it to the elder.
Kultn received that seal, sped pheasant-like,!
And came to Marv, unmarked. He tarried there
Until the twentieth of the month—the day
That was unlucky for Bahram Chubina,?

Who was at home attended by one slave,

With apples, quinces, and pomegranates placed
Before him. All alone Kulun approached

The gate and said thus to the porter: “ Sir!

I bring word from the daughter of the Khan,
And I am neither warrior nor Persian.

That pious lady hath entrusted me

With secrets, which for her sake must be kept,
For this great monarch. She is ailing too,
And is with child. Tell him that I may give
My message to the crowned and famous chief.”

The noble chamberlain made haste, went in,
Came to the entrance of the warrior’s chamber,
And said: “ A scurvy-looking messenger,

Clad in a sheep-skin, hath arrived and saith :—
‘I carry from the daughter of the Khan
A message to thy potent lord.’ ”

Replied
Bahram Chubina: “Say to him: ‘ Display
Thy visage also at the chamber-door.’ ”’

Kultin drew near and from the doorway showed
His head. On seeing an old man weak and wretched
Bahram Chubina said to him: “ If thou
Hast letters give them up.”

Kulun rejoined :—-
*“ I have a message only and will speak not
With others by.”
Bahram Chubfna said :—
* Cf. Vol. vii. p. 88 note. *C/. p. 337.

Google

C. 1968
<pb n="340"/>
C. 1969

340 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

‘** Approach without more mystery and tell it
Within mine ear.”’
Kulun drew near. The knife

Was up his sleeve. His villainy grew plain.
He feigned to whisper and then struck. A cry
Rose from the room. Now when Bahram Chibina
Called out the people ran to him. He said :—
‘* Arrest the fellow. Ask who prompted him.”

Then all within the palace came and dragged
That hoary-headed man off by the feet,
The servants in their fury smiting him
With palms and fists. He took the buffetings,
And opened not his lips from noon till midnight,
Then when he had been broken, hand and foot,
They flung him down within the palace-court,
And gathered in their sorrow and dismay
About Bahram Chubina. He still bled,
And groaned. His cheeks were lapis-lazuli.
His sister too had come to him forthwith.
She tore her hair, laid on her lap his head,
Then wailed and cried right bitterly : “‘ Brave horse-

man !

The lion used to flee the woods before thee !
Who hath removed this Column of the world ?
Who hath o’erthrown this mighty Elephant ?
Woe for the cavalier of chieftain-mould,
World-conqueror, undaunted, lion-queller !
Thou didst not serve the Shah, and no God-server
Was he that smote thine elephantine form.
Alas! who tore this tall, exalted Mountain
Out of the pleasant waters by the roots ?
Who hath plucked up so flourishing a Cypress ?
Who cast this crown of greatness basely down ?
Who filled the ocean suddenly with dust ?
Who hurled this moving Mountain to the abyss ?
Now alien, friendless, helpless, and alone

Google

<pb n="341"/>
*

KHUSRAU PARWiz 341

We live despised in other men’s domains,
I said to him: ‘oO captain of the host !
Uproot thou not the sprout of loyalty,
For if a daughter only had been left
Sprung from Sdsdn she would assume the crown,
The whole face of the land would be her slave,
Her blest crown touch the sky.’ Thoy wouldst not

hear .
My profitable words but now repentest
Thy deeds and bear’st a guilty soul to God.
Ill is on our great house; we are the sheep ;
Our foemen are like wolves.”

The wounded man,

On hearing what she said and Seeing all

Thy counsel yet the measure of my days

Is full. I acted not on thine advice ;

A dfiv-like guide led me in everything.

No prince was more exalted than Jamshid,
Through whom the world was full of fear and hope,
Yet erred he at the bidding of the divs

So that he made the world black for himself.
‘Twas just the same with watchful Kai Kaus,
Heaven’s favourite whose steps were fortunate.
The loathly Diy’s incitements ruined him ;

The evils that befel him thou hast heard :

He mounted heavenward to look upon

The circling Sky and course of sun and moon,

But fell into the deep beyond Sari,
Headforemost.1 In like manner hath the Diy
Caused me to err and docked my hand from good.

* Cf. Vol. ii. p. 102 seq.

Google
<pb n="342"/>
342 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

‘ Thine is the royal diadem,’ he said,
‘From Aries to Pisces all is thine.’
I do repent mine evil deeds. God’s pardon
Were gracious to me. Thus was destiny
Writ o’er my head; why should I mourn the past ?
The water riseth o'er me; grief and joy
Are both as wind to me: ‘twas written thus ;
What was to be hath been; none can abate,
Or greaten ills. Thy counsels are mine heirlooms,
Thy sayings are mine earrings. Right and wrong
Are over; call not fruitless words to mind,
But turn to God and place your confidence
Where fortune smileth. He is friend enough
In troubles ; tell none of your grief and joy.
My destined portion of the world is mine,
The end is come and now I must depart.”

Then to Yalan-sina he said: “I leave
The whole host, throne, the kingship and the state,
To thee. Do thou take heed of my good sister :
Thou wilt not need another counsellor.
Part not asunder. May disunion
Ne’er come between you twain. Abide not long
Within this hostile territory. I
Came hither and am weary of the place.
Go and present you to Khusrau Parwiz,
Speak and hear him.? If he shall pardon you
Hail not another as your sun and moon.
Take many greetings from me to Gurdwi,
And tell him what hath chanced.22 Make me my

charnel

Within fran, and wreck my palace here.
Much trouble have I suffered through the Khan,
And have not found him gracious for one day.
It was no guerdon for my toils to have
A div dispatched to slay me, yet in truth,

* Couplet omitted. * Two couplets omitted.

Google
<pb n="343"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 343

If he shall hear of this, he will not know
What he should think. None save Iranians
Conceived this plan, and had the Div for guide.”
He called a scribe and wrote, as there was need,

This letter to the Khan: ‘‘ Bahram Chiubina
Hath passed away in failure, shame, and woe.
Be good to those I leave and keep them safe
From toil and trouble caused by enemies,
For I have never wronged thee but ensued
Whate’er was wise and right.”

He gave his sister
Much good advice, embraced her darling head,
And laid his mouth against her ear, his eyes
Suffused with blood, and he gave up the ghost.
All wept him bitterly and lived in sorrow.
His sister in her pain bewailed him sorely,
And kept recalling all her brother’s words :
Her heart was riven by her grief for him.
She had a narrow silver coffin made,
She wrapped brocade around that warrior-form,
With raiment of fine linen neath his vest,
And covered him with camphor, face and all.

The process of this Wayside Inn is so!

Toil not, thou knowest that thou needs must go.
Quaff not thou grief but wine by day and night
With lips all laughter and with heart-delight.

§ 38
How the Khan had Tidings of Bahrdm Chibina’s Deuth

and how he destroyed the House and Family of
Kulin

When tidings came about Bahram Chiubina,
And what his gory had entailed on him,

Google

C. 1971
<pb n="344"/>
344 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And when his letter too arrived, and when

The messenger had told his tale, the Khan

Was grieved at heart, his eyes were filled with
blood,

His cheeks became like lapis-lazuli.

Amazed he called his veteran counsellors,

And told the fate of brave Bahram Chubina

While every one that heard it wept for woe.

All Chin bewailed right bitterly and burned,

Without a fire, for anguish. Then the Khan

Investigated all to ascertain

The author of the crime and, when he found

That ’twas Kharradd who planned that wicked
deed,

Exclaimed : “‘ How did that dog escape when he

Had turned such fire as this on us ? ”’

Kulun

Had two sons living in Turan as well

As divers friends and kinsmen. When the Khan

Had learned the truth he burned Kulun’s house
down,

And all about it, flinging on the flames

His sons and giving all their goods to spoil.

Then when the queen’s turn came he had her
haled

Forth from the curtains by her hair, seized all

Her goods, and heeded not her misery.

He sent swift dromedaries everywhere :

Kharrdad, son of Barzin, came not to hand.

The Khan grieved long, arraying all his slaves

Throughout the land of Chin in mourning weeds,

For he had loved Bahram Chubina’s deeds.

Google
<pb n="345"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 345

§ 89

How Khusrau Parwiz had Tidings of the Slaying of
Bahrém Chiubina and honoured Kharrdd, Son of

Barzin

Now when Kharrad, son of Barzin, approached

Khusrau Parwiz and told what he had done,

And seen and heard, the Shah’s heart joyed for he

Was quit of that opponent worshipful.

He showered many drachms, robes, and much else

Upon the poor. They wrote to every king

And chief a letter in the ancient tongue

To tell what God almighty, the All-just, :

Had brought to pass and how He had sent up

Dust from that foe. The Shah too wrote a letter

In royal wise to Cesar. For a se’nnight

They held festivities and called for harp

And wine in every quarter of the city.

The Shah sent offerings to the fanes of Fire,

And robes of honour to the Great. He told

Kharrad, son of Barzin: ‘‘ Thou hast deserved

To have the crown and throne,” and filled his mouth

With royal gems; the treasurer poured dinars,

Some hundred thousand, out before his feet

On such wise that they grew as high as he.

The Shah said: ‘* Whoso turneth from the way!

Shall have his day bedimmed although he be

In battle like the brave Bahram Chubina

From whom an ancient Turk hath raised the dust.”
The chiefs all blessed Khusrau Parwiz and said :—

** Without thee never be the crown and signet,

And if, in spite of all thy loving-kindness,

A man would have thy face lack radiancy

Then let him as Bahram Chubina be.”

1 Reading with P.

Google

C. 1972
<pb n="346"/>
C. 1973

346 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

§ 40
How the Khan sent his Brother to Gurdya, the Sister of
Bahrdm Chibina, with a_ Letter touching her
Brother's Death and asking her in Marriage as
his Queen, and her Answer

Now when the Khan’s heart was relieved and Chin

Was all like clay with gore he said one day :—

** Weak men, weak deeds! but I was well content

And gladdened through Bahram Chubina’s prowess.

Now why have I allowed the hero’s kin

To bide in so much weakness and contempt ?

I shall be blamed by all that hear thereof,

And in the future none will trust mine oath.

I have not soothed his little son’s distress

Or have concerned me for his kin although

He was related to me through my daughter,

And heart and soul compact of love and wisdom.”
He bade his brother come and spake at large :—

** E‘en as a pheasant flieth in a garden

Betake thyself to Marv, look on the kin

Of brave Bahram Chubina, greet them well,

And say: ‘* By God and by the throne of greatness

I had no knowledge of this villainy.

I too am stricken to the heart and wrapped

In grief while I shall live, and in revenge

Have bathed the surface of the land in gore.

The cities curse, but bless Bahram Chubina.

Although I should take vengeance for this hurt,

And bring the heaven down, one in a hundred

Would not avenge so famed a hero’s blood ;

But no one, as all wise men know, can ’scape

From God’s decree. This was assigned to him,

And all through the perverse Div’s sorcery.

I hold to my first pledge and will keep faith.’

Google
<pb n="347"/>
KHUSRAU PARW1Z 347

Convey a separate letter to Gurdya :—
‘QO holy lady of unsullied skirt !
Thou art all uprightness and kindliness,
Of lofty nature, far from all defect.
Long have I mused upon thy state, while wisdom
Hath been in secret session with my heart,
And have found no lord fitter than myself
For thee, so grace my curtains by thy counsel ;
Thee will I hold as mine own soul and body,
And do mine utmost to keep faith with thee.
Then all in this state shall be thine to bid,
And I will pledge my heart to do thy will.
Now gather all thy friends, discuss the matter
Before the wise and see what seemeth best
To thy bright mind when thou hast wisely weighed.
Let wisdom rule thy words and then inform me.’ ”
That atheling, his brother, heard and like

A turtle-dove from cypress sped to Marv,
And to Bahram Chubina’s kindred bare
The letter and good will, told what the Khan
Had said and how he passioned to avenge
The slain, then added: ‘ Sages and archmages
Approven well and vigilant of heart !
Herein may much good tidings come to you,
And may the almighty Judge befriend the dead.
This sudden death—no trifle-—was a thing
That none expected.”

Then he gave the sister,
But privily, the letter and the message
Sent by the Khan. He spake of their connexion,
Her counsel and fair words, of past and present,
And of the purity and piety
Of women that both counsel and console.
The young man spake, the lady of the skirt
Unsullied heard him but made choice of silence.
Thereafter, when she had perused the letter,

Google
<pb n="348"/>
348 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!

And all the words of the imperious Khan,
She made her wisdom and her knowledge mates,
Thought out her answer and informed the brother :—
I have perused this letter and held session
With wisdom. Just what kings, experienced folk,
And potentates would do the Khan hath done.
Oh! may our eyes be bright upon the man
That seeketh thus to avenge us! May the world
Ne’er lack the Khan, and may the crown of greatness
Rejoice in him. May care ne’er wound his heart,
And may he ne’er despair. We sat in counsel.
I read thy letter over, every whit,
And all the men of wisdom and of might
Agree to entertain this wish of thine.
Howbeit all my family are now
In sorrow and the subject 1s ill-timed.
When mourning for so great a chief is over
The Khan’s commandment shall not be transgressed.
I purpose not to go back to [ran.
Naught can be better for a virtuous dame
Than to be married, but if I shall come
In haste what will the wise king say of me ?
If in the midst of grief I aim at joy
I shall not act with virtue or respect ;
The wise will say that I lack modesty,
The Khan himself will think me indiscreet.
When four months of this mourning have elapsed
I will dispatch a horseman to the king.
Meanwhile hear will I what I ought to hear—.
All that my counsellors may have to urge—
And state it in a letter to the king
When mine adviser goeth unto him.
As for the present, fare rejoicing hence,
And tell the Khan the message that I send.”’
She gave the envoy many gifts, and he,
A man experienced, left Marv joyfully.

Google

<pb n="349"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 349

§ 41
How Gurdya consulted her Nobles and fled from Marv

Then at her leisure that young, prudent dame
Consulted with her counsellors and said :—

** A new thing, one that ne’er will stale with me,
Hath chanced: the Khan, that ruler of the world,
In flattering terms hath asked for me in marriage.
He hath no fault; he is a king, great, brave,
And master of the armies of Turan.

None dared to name me while my Lion lived.
For twelve years after I had lost my sire
The brave Bahram Chubina took in charge
Mine orphanhood and raged when any one
Demanded me in marriage. Now the Khan
Is not a person of small consequence,

And he hath both ability and power.

Howbeit when he striveth to make kinship
Between the Turks and the [rdnians

From that bond and connexion time will see
Both travail and affliction in the end.

Look what it was that Siyawush received
Except sun-burning from Afrasiyab !

That youth unmatched by other mother’s son
Gave from the first his head up to the wind.
What did that chieftain’s son too do but send
The dust up from fran and from Turan ?
Contrive that unknown to the Turks we may
Convey this story to fran forthwith.

I have dispatched a letter to Gurdwi,

For I had apprehensions on this score,

That he might ope my matter to the Shah,
And tell my toil and care. God helping me,
He will both hear and grant my fair appeal.”

Google

C. 1975
<pb n="350"/>
C. 1976

350 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!

They said: “‘ Thou art for life our youthful lady
In Chin and in fran. An iron mountain
Could not displace thee, and thou guidest heroes
To manliness. Thou art more shrewd than sages,
More full of counsel than wise ministers.
We are thy subjects all; ’tis thine to bid,
And thine to judge and deal with this request.”
On hearing this she called the muster-roll,
And opened offices to pay the troops,
Went forth, inspected every one of them,
And chose eleven hundred and three score,
Each one of whom would face ten cavaliers
In fight. She furnished drachms and then returning
To her abode harangued her warlike powers :—
‘“* He that hath ever seen a stirrup-strap
Is not perturbed because of ups and downs.
He feareth not a murderous multitude
E’en if the clouds shall shower heads on him ;
He will not turn from me when I retreat ;
He will not be afraid when foemen charge.
Fare we toward fran, fare we toward
The monarch of the brave. Here in Turan
We are but strangers, destitute and friendless,
Weak as we are and abject mid the great.
Withdraw we then when darkness hath set in,
And when our foemen’s heads are dull with sleep.
Let not your hearts be straitened on the way
If any troops of Chin encounter us,
Because the chieftains with their massive maces
Will follow us past doubt, but let us each
Take his own life in hand and, if they come,
Give and get blows withal; but all of you
That disapprove of this! abide ye here.”’
They shouted: ‘“ We are lieges and obey.”
This understood, they rose and made them ready
For war with Chin. [zid Gashasp, the chief,

Google
<pb n="351"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 351

And Yalan-sina mounted with the troops,
Who all said: “‘ Better perish with renown
Than live and let the men of Chin prevail.”’

She crossed the desert to the caravans ;
She had the camels passed in front of her,
And chose three thousand to transport her baggage.
At night like some illustrious cavalier
She mounted, mace in hand ; her charger’s mail
Was splendid, and she wore a breastplate, sword,
And battle-helm, then led both night and day,
Swift as the wind, her host upon its way.

§ 42

How the Khan received Tidings of the Flight of Gurdya
and how he sent Tuwurg' with an Army after her,
and how Gurdya slew Tuwurg

A number of deserters from her force

Arrived to seek protection from the Khan.

His brother came and said: ‘*‘O famous chief,
And lover of the fray ! some valiant troops
Have made toward fran, and many others

Have sought for my protection. Realm and host
Will laugh for ever at thy court’s disgrace.”’

The chieftain’s cheek, when he had heard the words,
Grew white with anger, and he answered: ‘‘ Haste,
And lead an army forth. Observe what road
Those troops have taken. When thou reachest them
Act not injuriously but first of all
Make use of honied words, for of them none
Hath any knowledge of our usages ;

Their fear perchance hath turned us into foes.
Speak with all unction and entreat them well ;

» Reading with P.

Google

C. 1977
<pb n="352"/>
352 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

Encourage them by loving-kindliness ;
But if they offer armed resistance play
The man and let there by no dallying ;
Make one tomb for the whole of them at Marv
So that the earth may be like pheasant’s plumes.”
He went forth with six thousand valiant horsemen,
Picked Turks, and on the fourth day overtook
The Iranians, but that lion-hearted dame
Was not concerned beholding them. She left
The army, visited as swift as wind
The cameleers, disposed the baggage-train
Behind the lines, and then surveyed the field.
She donned her brother’s armour and bestrode
A fiery steed. The hosts were ranked. Each man
Took his own life in hand. Tuwurg came forth
Before his troops (the Khan was wont to call him
“Old Wolf ’”’) and said to the [rdnians :—
“Is not the virtuous dame in this great host ?”
For Gurdya was arrayed in heavy mail,
And had her waist girt like a warrior’s,
So that the valiant billman knew her not,
But spurring on his steed and coming near
Said to her: ‘‘ Midst this army where shall I
Seek for the sister of the murdered Shah,
For I have many things to say to her,
Respecting both the present and the past ?”
She answered: “ Here am I prepared to charge

A ravening lion.”’

When he heard the voice
Of her that rode a lusty lion-steed
He was amazed and said: ‘‘ The Khan of Chin
Of all the kingdom made a choice of thee
To keep him mindful of Bahram Chubina,
The Lion and the chosen cavalier.
He said: ‘I will requite the favour done
If only thou wilt listen to my words.’

Google

<pb n="353"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 353

He said to me: ‘ Haste unto her and say :—
‘If what I spake was not acceptable
Know that my words were not imperative,
And that I have renounced what I proposed.
If is not well for thee to quit our coasts :
Attempt it not although thou wilt not wed.’
Join words together unto this effect,
And if she will not take advice use bonds
For her and all that have supported her.
This is too much !’ ’”!

She answered: ‘“ Let us quit
The field and troops, and I will answer thee
Advisedly on all points.”

He approached
That famed and valiant dame who, seeing him
Alone, displayed to him her face beneath
Her sable casque, and said: ‘“‘ Thou hast beheld
‘** Bahram Chubina’s horsemanship and courage
With admiration: his full sister I.
His day is done so I now will essay thee.
I long to fight with thee. If thou shalt find
That I am worthy of a husband say so.
Good sooth ! thou mayst approve me as thy spouse ! ”
She spake, then spurred her steed. Izid Gashasp

Rode close behind her. With her spear she struck
The girdle of Tuwurg and pierced his mail.
He tumbled headlong, and the sand beneath
Ran blood. With chosen warriors Yalin-sina
Charged and discgmfited the host of Chin,
Slew, overthrew, and wounded many a man,
Pursued the foe two leagues and left few mounted.
The whole plain was a-stream with blood that day,
This man was headless, that head-downward lay.

1‘ Arrange les affairs de cette mani¢re, et si un conseil du Khakan -

ne te suffit pas, fais un traité. Quiconque croit le Khakan capable
de faire ce que ¢u crains, dépasse ce qu’il est permis de dire.”’ Mohl.
VOL. VIII. 7

Google

C. 1978
<pb n="354"/>
354 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSTI

§ 43
How Gurdya wrote to Gurdwt

Victorious she drew toward fran,

She drew toward the monarch of the brave,

But halted for a short time at Amwi

With questionings increasing in her heart.

She wrote thence to her brother, telling him

In sorrow all that occurred, and said :—

‘* What time the brave Bahram Chubina died,
All care and grief fraternal, to us both

He proffered much good counsel. May we never
Distress his spirit! Furthermore he said :—
‘Inform the exalted monarch of the counsels
That thou hast heard from me.’ A mighty host,
All men of name and warriors, pursued us,

But I have so entreated them in fight

That never more will they see fight or feast.
With me are many famous chiefs, and harm
Must not be theirs. Till my good star convey

A hoped response I pause upon the way.”

§ 44
How Khusrau Parwiz slew Bandwi

C. 1979 From that time forth the Shah sat undisturbed,
Since brave Bahram Chubina was no more,
And found no chieftain hostile and disposed
To counter him in fight. One day he thus
Addressed his upright minister: ‘* How long
Shall I conceal my thoughts ? Shall my sire’s slayer
For ever be about me as a kinsman ?

Google

<pb n="355"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 355

Now that I have the power and feel aggrieved
What should result ? ”
They spread the board and quaffed,

And put Bandwi in fetters that same day.
The Shah thereafter bade his minister :—
‘Cut off his hands and feet; he will not then
Gird up his loins to shed the blood of kings.”’

They lopped him and he died forthwith, resigning
His blood-stained life up to Khusrau Parwiz.
The Shah then sent a man to Khurasan
With strict injunctions: ‘‘ Hold thy tongue and go
Hence to the marchlord’s court. Bid Gustaham :—
‘When thou hast read my letter come forthwith.’ ”’

The envoy reached in Khurasan the court
Of one at ease and gave the Shah’s behest,
That youthful Shah who poured out blood with zest.

§ 45

How Gustaham rebelled against Khusrau Parwiz and
took Gurdya to Wife

When Gustaham heard this he summoned all

His scattered troops, set forth upon the march,
And passing by Sarf and by Amul

Came to Gurg4an—the country of the Great—
Heard that the Shah had grown severe and slain
Bandwi, his brother, unexpectedly,

Whereat he gnawed his hands, gat from his steed,
Rent all his raiment as a paladin,

And wailing poured the dust upon his head,
Perceiving that the world-lord would avenge
Hurmuzd on him. He turned back sorrowing,
And, thou hadst said : ‘“‘ Companioning the wind.”

Google
<pb n="356"/>
C. 1989

356 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Collecting all his scattered troops he marched

Toward the forest of Narwan and, when

He reached the mountains of Amul, drew up

His army in that forest, thence made raids,

And thus began a system of revenge.

He found a living for all workless men,

And where he heard that royal troops were camped

Descended on them and destroyed them all.
Now when Gurdwi arrived he told the Shah

All that his sister with her warriors

Had done against the marchlords of the Khan,

And how she made their dust go up at Marv,

While Gustaham, on his side, was informed

That brave Bahram Chiubfna’s days were done,

And that Gurdya with many troops had fled

That fierce chief,! that a host had followed her

To take revenge, and how she had entreated

Those famous men of Chin. He called to horse,

And from that forest led his troops like wind

To meet her. When Gurdya was ware she went

Forth with her chiefs and nobles. Gustaham,

On seeing them, rode out before his troops.

He met Gurdya and was o’ercome by pain

And much remorse about Bahram Chiubina,

Spake also of his sorrow for Bandwi,

And wiped blood from his eyelids with his sleeve.

He lighted weeping from his steed at sight

Of Yalan-sina and I[zid Gashasp,?

And said: “ The Shah hath slain Bandwi; his day

Is over and thou wouldst have said: ‘ The Shah

Was not his sister’s son. Bandwi bled not

For him who used to pour his very soul

Out at Bandwi’s feet and lamented him

When absent!’ Now upon the earliest chance

The Shah, true to the instincts of his race,

1 The Khan. * Reading with P.

Google

oe eee ee

<pb n="357"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 357

Hath severed from Bandwi both hands and feet !
So now what hope can ye have in the Shah,
For never came fruit from the willow’s bough ?
He will entreat your kindred even worse,
And make meat in the city cheap enough.
E’en at a distance he will rage to see,
And plan new vengeance on, Yalan-sina,
Thou being Bahram Chubina’s general,
And having power through him. Let each that
knoweth
The Shah be ware or better cut his throat !
If ye will stay with us we will consult
On all things great and small.” |
The hearers took
His counsel; they all shunned destruction’s path.
He spake in earnest to Gurdya, recounting
Bahram Chubina’s acts. She was o’ercome
By what he said, and felt that he was right.
All joined him and his clouded counsels cleared.
** Doth not,” thus said he to Yalan-sina,
* This lady talk of marriage and desire
Its honours ? ”’
He replied: “ Wait till I speak,
And by long converse ascertain her will.”
He said to her: “‘O lady! I have seen thee
Act as adviser. Thou didst well to flee
The Khan, preferring wisely thine own race.
What sayest thou to the Shah’s maternal uncle,
The valiant and the wealthy Gustaham,
The captain and the leader of a host ?”’
She said: ‘‘ A spouse that cometh from [ran
Ne’er will despoil my kindred.”
So Yalan-sina
Gave her to Gustaham—a gallant hero
Of royal lineage—who tended her
Like a fresh apple, for he saw in this

Google

C. 1981
<pb n="358"/>
358 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

His exaltation nothing of a fall.

The armies sent forth by Khusrau Parwiz

Found their old fortune altogether changed,

And Gustaham, on seeing a host o’erthrown,
Would spare the troops and take them for his own.

§ 46

How Khusrau Parwiz took Counsel with Gurdiit con-
cerning Gustaham and how Gurdya, prompted by
Gurduwi, slew him

Time passed ; the Shah’s soul grieved at Gustaham.
One day he said in anger to Gurdwfi :—
‘*So Gustaham hath got Gurdya to wife,
And those great companies resort, methinketh,
To him by her advice. A spy of mine
Hath come back from Amul and all is clear.”
He spake thus till it darkened, and the eyes
Of warriors failed, then while the slaves brought lights
And wine they sent all strangers from the hall,
And holding conclave with Gurdwi the Shah
Discussed affairs and said: “I have dispatched
Great forces to Amul to take revenge,
And all have come back wounded and in bonds,!
Have come back full of sorrow and dismay.
There is one plan—a trifle when compared
With crown and throne. Although Bahram Chubina
Erred yet Gurdya was ever on our side,
And I have got a scheme, but keep it close.
A letter must be written to Gurdya,
Like wine-streams in the garth of Paradise,
To say: ‘ Thou hast been friendly and hast helped me

1 ¢.e, in a state of disability.

Google

ee ae eee

<pb n="359"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 359

In all things everywhere. Much time hath passed
While my heart’s secret was not on my tongue,
But now the time for speaking hath arrived
Because Gurdwi is as myself to me.}
Look out for some expedient to abate
This foul affliction and put Gustaham
Beneath the stones; then both my heart and home
Are thine. This done, thy troops and partizans
Shall find protection with me everywhere,
Be nowhere treated with contempt, and I
Will give a province unto whom thou wilt
That they may act as rulers, and do thou
Come to the golden palace of my wives,
And thou shalt put an end to my revenge.
Thus will I pledge myself with many oaths,
And add to these yet more assurances.’ ”’
Gurdwi replied: ‘ May the king live for ever,
And be as Venus in the Sign of Virgo.
Thou know’st that I regard my children’s lives,
My fruitful lands and all my family,
However precious I account them all,
As worthless when contrasted with thy head.
I will send one to her on this affair
To give her light thereon. I shall require
A letter, written by the Shah and sealed
With his own signet, like a shining moon.
This will I send my sister by my wife,
And thus put off all our antagonists,
For this is woman’s work and specially
For one that is discreet. In mine opinion
Thy words should reach my sister, and the matter
Soon end as thou wouldst wish. The plan 1s perfect.”
Khusrau Parwiz, on hearing this, rejoiced,
And thought his cares wind, asked his treasurer

‘te. “IT may speak now that thy brother is mine own dearest
fricnd and so there is safe communication.”

Google

C. 1982
<pb n="360"/>
C. 1983

360 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

For paper, chose words redolent of musk,
And wrote a letter like a garden full
Of roses like the cheeks of the beloved,
Replete with pledges, oaths, and promises,
And manifold advice and flattery.
Whenas the ink of the inscription dried
They sealed the letter with a seal of musk.
Gurdwi wrote counsel too, and much besides,
Reciting first Bahram Chubina’s deeds
Disgracing all his family and land,
And adding: ‘“‘ God forgive him! May his wrangling
Cause no remorse in him! Those void of wisdom
Heed not the consequences of their acts.
Well, he hath gone and we shall follow him,
Confiding in the justice of our God.
My wife, on coming, will enlighten thee.
Swerve not from what she saith or thou wilt make
Thy fortune’s visage wan.”
He put the letter
Writ by the Shah inside his own and wrapped
Them both in painted silk. The wary wife
Took them and heard those peremptory words.
She hasted for the forest of Narwan—
A woman sent as envoy to a woman.
Thereat Gurdya became like jocund Spring
With cheeks all grace and colour and perfume.
They talked at large about Bahram Chubina,
And wept. Then privily Gurdwi’s wife gave
Gurdya the letter and made plain the path.
That lion-woman saw the Shah’s dispatch
And, thou hadst said, looked down upon the moon.
She laughed and said: ‘‘ None with five friends would
think

This matter difficult.”

She called her five,
And stationed them by Gustaham’s bed-chamber.

Google
<pb n="361"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 3601

She read to them the letter of the Shah,

But kept it from the chiefs in general.

When she had said her say she quickly made

A compact with them and shook hands thereon.

At night she put the lights out and at once
Pressed with her hands upon her husband’s mouth ;
Some of the five too came to give her aid,

Came to the couch of that illustrious one.

She struggled greatly with the drunken man,

And silenced him at last. The general

Died in the darkness and bequeathed both night
And shining day to others. There arose

Within the city shouts and cries for help,

In every quarter tempest rose and fire, |

And when the dauntless lady heard the din

She clothed her in a Ruman coat of mail.

That night she called the Iranians, spake at large
About the murdered man, showed the Shah’s letter,
And so emboldened them. They blessed the event,
And showered jewels on the document.

§ 47

How Gurdya wrote to Khusrau Parwiz and how he
summoned and married her

That dauntless lady called for pen and inkstand,
And sat at ease among her counsellors.

She wrote a letter to the Shah concerning

His friends and foes, first praised those that eschew
Revenge, then said: ‘“ The bidding of the Shah
Hath been obeyed as loyal hearts would wish,

And through the fortune of the valiant world-lord
That great host hath dispersed. What further orders

Google

C. 1984
<pb n="362"/>
362 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Hast thou to give? What further wilt thou hang
On thy slave’s earring ? ”

When the letter reached
Khusrau Parwiz he joyed in her the more.
The mighty Lion sought a messenger,
High-starred, an honest man and shrewd of soul,
And wrote a letter like the Artang of Chin,?
With many blessings in it, summoning
The noble lady to the court, and in it
Called her the Diadem upon the moon.

The envoy came dust-swift to her and told
All that the Shah had said. The lion-lady
Became like radiant roses in the Spring-tide
By reason of that letter, called and paid
Her troops, and loaded up when it was day.

As she approached the city of the Shah

An army met her; when she reached the court

The Shah received her, and she found him kind.

Thereafter she produced great offerings,

As did the chieftains in her company,

Exhibited the goods and all the wealth,

Then gave them to the royal treasurer—

Dinars and kingly jewels past compute,

Gold-woven brocade, crowns, girdles, golden thrones,

And golden shields. Khusrau-Parwiz beheld

That noble Cypress-tree with cheeks like Spring,

And pheasant’s gait, with countenance like day,

And locks like night, while pearls, thou wouldst have
said,

Rained from her lips. He sent her to his bower,

Gave her precedence there, sent to her brother—

His own resourceful minister—to ask her

In marriage, took and held her dear as life,

While robes of honour, coin, and much beside

He showered upon the comrades of his bride.

' Arzhang in the original. See Vol. li. p. 19 note.

Google

ee
er. a Saw snail

OD EN ®
<pb n="363"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 363

§ 48

How Gurdya showed her Accomplishment before Khusrau
Parwiz

Two se’nnights passed away. “ By sun and moon,
By throne and casque,’’ he said to her, “‘ narrate
Thy battle with the soldiers of the Khan,

And gird thy loins as thou wast girded then.”’

‘*O Shah!” she thus made answer, “ live for ever,
And be souls nourished by the sight of thee.
Command thy men to bring a charger here,

A saddle and choice lasso and a bow,
A spear and helmet and a warrior’s mail,
Besides a quiver filled with poplar arrows.”’

The Shah then bade the servitors: ‘“‘ Prepare

A place within the pleasance.”’
Heedfully

Those slaves from Rum and Turkistan attended.
Twelve hundred Beauties of Khusrau Parwiz
(Thou wouldst have said: “ The garden hath not

room,’’)
Arrived preceded by sunlike Shirin
In height a silver column as she walked.
Gurdya approached the Shah and bade a slave
Bring coat of mail and Ruman casque. She quitted
Her seat and came forth with her loins girt up
And spear in hand.! That all-accomplished dame
Drew nigh a black steed by the Shah’s command,
Set on the ground the butt-end of her spear,
And vaulted to the saddle swift as wind.
She chose her field of action in the pleasance,
Wheeled her about on all sides right and left,
And pierced the dark clouds with her battle-cries.

> Couplet omitted.

Google

C. 1935
<pb n="364"/>
C. 1986

364 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

She told the Shah: ‘ What time I fought Tuwurg
I was an angry Wolf as I am now.”
Shirin said: ‘ Wilt thou arm thy foes, O king,
For she is thinking of her brother’s death,
And will, I fear, consign thee to the wind ?
Thou wearest but a robe upon the throne
Of gold, and she can reach thee any time! ”’
He laughed and answered: “Then provoke her
not.”

The moon-faced lady wheeled amid the dust.
She was a heroine in love and war,
And said: ‘‘ Would that a foeman of the Shah’s
Were here before me on the battlefield.
I would unhorse him as I did Tuwurg
Here in the Great King’s presence.”

He was all
Astound, she had such stature, thews, and limbs.
He said to her: ‘‘ Thou wilt not have to rail
At fortune. Let me see if thou art quelled
By wine or unaffected.”’

Then she took—
That lady-paladin—a goblet filled
With royal wine, which Ahriman himself
Would have declined, and in the sight of all
Quaffed to the Shah and drained it at a draught ;
She knocked the dust out of that golden stream !
The Shah in wonder said: ‘‘ O warrior-moon !
I have about the world four generals,
Who have it in command to guard my life.
Each hath twelve thousand men—franians
And valiant cavaliers. I have withal
Within my golden bower and room of gems
Twelve thousand slaves, all pure, with torques and
earrings.

Henceforth thou art their overseer for thou
Dost toil and care for what is thine. I wish

Google
<pb n="365"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 305

To hear no word of them from any one,
Or young or old, save thee.”
Gurdya rejoiced
On hearing this; the slanders of her foes
Had harmed her not. She swept earth with her face,
And called down blessings on her sovereign’s Grace.

§ 49

How Khusrau Parwtz sent an ill-disposed Marchlord
to Rat and how he oppressed the Folk there

A long time passed ; meanwhile the monarch’s star
Sought only the ascendant, but one night,
As he was drinking wine among his sages,
His magnates and experienced officers,
There was a cup in use among the guests,
Graved with the name Bahram.! The Shah bade
throw

The cup away whereat they all began
To curse Bahram, the cup, and him that wrought it.
Thus said the Shah: ‘“ Now let the elephants
Of war tread down the fields and fells of Rai,
Expel the folk and turn it to a waste.”

The noble minister addressed him thus :—
‘“O thou memorial of mighty kings !
Consider that the state of Rai is large,
Not one for elephants to trample on,
For God and all good folk would disapprove.”

The king replied: “ I want one ill-disposed
And of low birth to act as marchlord there,
One who Is coarse of speech and ignorant.”

’ The cup had belonged to, or the name on it suggested, Bahram
Chubina.

Google
<pb n="366"/>
366 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!

‘Do thou, O king! ”’ the minister rejoined,
‘’ Characterize the wretch, and I will seek,

And bring him, otherwise we have no guide.”’
Khusrau Parwiz replied: “I want a gabbler,
Ill-starred, red-haired, foul and with nose askew,

With sallow face, malicious, squat, and soured,

C. 1987 A coward, vile and gloomy, vengeful, lying,
Green-eyed and squinting, with projecting teeth,
And humped like wolf in gait.”

The archimages

Were all amazed that he should speak of such,
And all made search about the world, amidst
The cities, and among the great and small.
One day a man brought one such to the Shah,!
Who said: ‘ Tell thine ill deeds in fitting terms.”’

The man replied: “ I cease not to do ill,
I have no wisdom and I say one thing
And do another, and snub all that greet me.
My stock is lies; I never help the right ;
I break my pledge and fling nobility,
Both root and stem, to garth.”

Khusrau Parwiz

Made answer: “‘ May thine evil star ne’er change.”

They gave him Rai by patent, so the wretch
Grew great by turpitude. They gave to him
Troops that had been dismissed. He left the court,
Famed for depravity. The miscreant,
When he arrived at Rai, put off all fear
Of God, and bade the gutters of the roofs
Be torn away: this gave him much delight,
And afterward he had all cats destroyed,
Which gave great umbrage to the householders.
Where’er he went he took with him a guide,
While in the front of them a herald walked,
Proclaiming: “ If I see a gutter left,

1 Two couplets omitted.

Google
<pb n="367"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 367

Or cat within a house, I will set fire

To house and field, and stone the inmates’ heads.”
He would turn out a place to find one drachm,

And vex its owner. All the people left

Their homes in terror and gave up their lands.

There were no gutters when the rain came down,

No watchman in the city. Through the foul

And ill-conditioned miscreant that came

From court to Rai that city was laid waste.

The sun beat down upon the people’s heads,

The place was full of pain and wretchedness,

And not a soul regarded their distress.

§ 50

How Gurdya made Sport before Khusrau Parwiz and
how he gave Rai to her

Thus was it till the month of Farwardin,

And rose-leaves decked the surface of the earth,

Until the clouds’ tears grew as large as hail,

And tulips filled the valleys and the plains,

Till all the dales were dappled like a pard,

And earth was coloured like brocade of Rum.

The chieftains came to sport within the garths,

And to the uplands flocked all sheep and deer.

Khusrau perceived the garden’s open gates,

The water-birds disporting on its streams,

And bade the trumpets sound. They carried thither

Jars of perfumes, sat down upon the grass,

Called out for wine and decked their souls with joy.
A man from Rai approached Gurdwi and told

All that had happened. He was grieved at heart,

And sought in his concern a remedy.

He told his sister: ‘‘ Thou must tell the Shah.

Google

C. 1988
<pb n="368"/>
C. 1989

308 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

See if thou canst devise a scheme to make
His heart indifferent in this regard.”
Anon Gurdya produced a kitten, clad
As ’twere a child, upon a courser trapped
With gold and jewels. In the kitten’s ears
Were earrings and its claws were tulip-hued,
Its eyes were pitch-like, languishing like those
Of folk bemused, its cheeks were like the Spring.
It rode about the garden like a child
With saddle-flaps of gold. The Shah laughed out,
And laughter took possession of the court.
** What,” said he to Gurdya, “is thy desire,
My gracious lady ? ”’
That resourceful dame
At once did reverence. ‘“‘ Exalted Shah!”
She said, ‘‘ grant Rai to me, be wise again,
Release the hearts of woeful folk from grief,
Recall that wretched mannikin from Rai,
And term him miscreant and malefactor,
For he doth ban the cats and wreck all gutters ! ”
Khusrau Parwiz laughed out at his wife’s words,
And said: “ Thou saucy shatterer of hosts !
I give to thee the city and the lands.
Send thither presently some upright man,
And call back that malignant one from Rai,
Like Ahriman, that loathly infidel.”
The lady’s fortune waxed continually
Beneath that royal and illustrious Tree.

§ 51
How Khusrau Parwiz portioned out his Realm

Thereafter when the Shah’s hand was extended,
When all folk wished him well, when other kings

Google

<pb n="369"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 369

Were subject to him, and his other lieges
Had been enriched, he chose out of fran
Four times twelve thousand warlike cavaliers,
Brave and experienced, oped the ancient hoards
Filled by Pirdz and glorious Kubad,
Partitioned out the world in four and made
Appointments to the governments. He sent
Twelve thousand out of those illustrious men,
Shrewd cavaliers, deft wielders of the sword,
Toward the Ruman marches to safe-guard
That populous and glorious coast that troops
From Rum might not attack fran and lay
The country waste or any one encroach,
But be content with his own rank and fortune.
He chose moreover of the men of name
Out of [ran twelve thousand warlike horsemen
That they might march forth to Zabulistan
(They left a rose-garth for a gloomy land)}
And said to them: “ If any one shall turn
Out of the way, not keeping his own place,
Restore him to the path with courteousness,
But in worse cases use the chain and pit.
Send spies about to keep you well apprised ;
Ye will have need of outposts day and night,
And sleep not in your tents without a guard.”’
Out of the host he called twelve thousand others,
All magnates valorous and fond of fight,
And having given to them much advice
Dispatched them to the route of the Alans,
And charged them with the gate-way of the West?
So that no enemy might pass thereby.
He bade the chiefs: ‘‘ Be watchful and God guard
you.”
He chose and sent twelve thousand warriors more,
Such as were fit, to Khurasan, exhorting,
1'Ce pays a ferre nuire.”’  Mohl. * Darband. Sce Vol. i. p. 16.
VOL. VIII. 2A

Google
<pb n="370"/>
C. 1990

370 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And greatly charging: “‘ From Haital to Chin
Let none set foot upon our land save those,
Devoted and attached to me, that are
Admitted with my knowledge and command.
In all the provinces I have full hoards
Available to all. When ye have need

Ask and live happy, prudent and secure.”

He oped his treasuries’ doors and seeing drachms
With the inscription of Hurmuzd he wept,
And gave them to the poor with further gifts
When they were clothed. He cut the heads off all
The adherents of Bandwi and intimates
Of foul-mouthed Gustaham who had rejoiced
O’er his sire’s murder. Having made an end
Of cursing and revenge he wisely took
A new departure, portioning in four
The night and day, which make revolving time.
At one of these four seasons an archmage
Of goodly speech attended to inform
The Shah about the host and world’s affairs,
Who, if he noticed anything amiss
Among the people or the warriors,

Would ply forthwith the skirt of justice, learn
The facts, and find a way. Another time
Was given up to song and minstrelsy,

And quiet, careless session with his lords

As mighty men should do. The third was set
Apart for prayer and praising God, the fourth
For study of the starry sky above,

Its character, its nature, and its host.

The readers of the stars then stood before him
Because they were his guides to understanding ;
But during half of this night-period

He sat among the Idols of Taraz.

He also made division of each month

In four parts that life might be pleasurable :

Google
<pb n="371"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 371

One for the riding-ground, for archiry,

And polo with some noble to record ;

Or for the chase among the hills and plains

To keep himself in health, and when he left
The chase by day or night the affluent

Would decorate his route. The second part
Was given up to chess and nard and tales

Of battle, while the third was for the sages,
The scribes and story-tellers, who in turn
Narrated to him stories of the past,

While in the fourth the Shah received the envoys
Of other potentates and wrote his answers

To those exalted chiefs. With robes of honour
The envoys, gratified and satisfied,

Would set forth from the court and journey home.
On that day too for all the provinces

He used to write out patents and bestow them
On all the chiefs. When the New Year began
At Farwardin, and sunshine in men’s hearts
Relumed the Faith, he laid a treasure by,
Unknown to all his subjects, secretly.

§ 52

How Shirwi, the Son of Khusrau Parwiz, was born of
Maryam with bad Ausmces and how Khusrau
Parwiz informed Cesar

When he had reigned five years he had no peer,

And in the sixth year Cesar’s daughter bare him
An infant like the moon. °*Twas not the custom
To give the call to prayers! in infants’ ears

If delicately nurtured. Fathers spake

1 4.e. to proclaim loudly.

Google

C. 1991
<pb n="372"/>
C. 1992

372 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

One name into their ears—a private one!—
The other name was publicly announced.
The Shah in private called his son Kubad,
But publicly Shirwi of glorious race.
When of that night of birth there had elapsed
Three watches the astrologers approached
Khusrau Parwiz who asked: ‘‘ What have all those
Who read the stars observed, what will result,
And what is this young world-lord’s horoscope ? ”’
They said: “‘ Thou canst not scape the sky’s decree.
The earth will be in turmoil through this child ;
His army will not bless him. He withal
Will quit God’s path. What need we further say ? ”’
The upshot of their travail and those words
Unseemly grieved the Shah’s heart, and he said
Thus to the sages: ‘‘ Take a better view.
Be careful that ye speak no word thereof
Before the franian chiefs.”
He took good heed
Of that ill horoscope and laid it up
When he had sealed it with his royal signet.
The matter filled him with concern; he gave
No audience for a se’nnight and refrained
From chase and wine. None saw him for a space.
The chieftains all resorted to the archmage,
And held discourse at large to ascertain
What had befallen the illustricus Shah,
And why he gave not audience to his lieges.
The high priest sought the Shah, on hearing this,
And told the army’s words. He answered thus :—
‘** Fate troubleth me, and I am all concern
About the process of the turning sky
Through what the astrologers have said.”

1 As a precaution against evil influences. Sometimes children
were left un-named for a similar reason. Cf. Vol. 1. pp. 8, 177, 179
and CMN, p. 36 seg.

Google

eee eee we oe
<pb n="373"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIz 373

He bade
The treasurer: « Bring forth the painted silk
With script therein,”
; The treasurer produced,
The archmage scanned heart-straitened, and was
mute,

Why then should any sage suggest such things ?

May naught but joy be thine, Heed not their talk.
© Feap as heaven soweth and perforce

Must trust thereto. While heaven itself Shall last

At whiles will love and justice and at whiles

Strife and Tevenge prevail. From it the body

Thereat Khusrau Parwiz
Smiled and then gave his mind to other things.

For in the night Maryam hath borne a son,

Whose like thou ne'er hast seen. He needs must be
Both wise and fortunate, and through his virtues
Both worthy of the throne and bountiful,

So, as I do myself, live happily,

For joy and high estate pertain to thee.”’

Go gle
<pb n="374"/>
374 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

§ 53

How Ceasar wrote a Letter to Khusrau Parwiz, sent.

Gifts, and asked for the Cross of Christ

Now Cesar, when the letter reached him, saw

The superscription of Khusrau Parwiz,

And bade to blow the trumpet at his gate ;

The realm resounded. They adorned the wastes

And ways in honour of Shirwi the son

Ot Shah Khusrau Parwiz; the voice of minstrels

Rose from the state of Rum from end to end.

Folk went with many Crosses to the court,

The scent of roses and sweet perfumes rose.

Thus for seven days they Joyed with harp and wine
C. 1993 O’er prince Shirwi while Cesar on the eighth

Bade drivers with their caravans attend.

He loaded up with drachms a hundred camels,

And fifty with dinars by way of largess,

Two hundred with gold-woven brocade of Rum,

Thou wouldst have said: “ The fabric is all gold,”

With forty golden tables made with feet

Of coral, fitting for the use of kings,

With gold and silver effigies of beasts

With gems for eyes,! with robes of beaver-skins,

With silk from Chin, and with a golden laver

Adorned with emeralds. He sent Maryam

A peacock made of gold, and many gems.

He sent as tribute also forty million

Dinars of Rum with forty watchful Rumans

To guard it led by Khanagi—a man

Unmatched in wisdom. Thus with cameleers

Ten caravans went laden with dinars.

When tidings reached the conquering Shah: ‘“ An

envoy
1 Cf. Vol. vii. p. 36.

Google
<pb n="375"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 375

From Cesar draweth nigh,” he bade Farrukh,
A loyal marchlord, ruler of Nimruz,
High-born, a warrior, and the army’s Lustre,
To mount. With him went horsemen of the Shah
With golden helms. When Khanagi descried
Those troops afar he boldly rode ahead
Until they reached the Shah and that famed court.
On seeing his fair face and splendid throne
All louted to the ground and homaged him.
Then Khanagi, his face in dust, exclaimed :—
“*O lord of justice, holy man! may God,
The All-conquering, bless thee, mayst thou ever be
The Shah and glad.”
The chiefs arose and made

Room for him near the Shah to whom he said :—
** Whose wisdom is like thine ? Thou art more bright
Than Sol in heaven, more lasting than the soul
Of eloquence. May this world never lack
A king like thee, and may time bear him fruit.
May none behold the day whereon thy will
Is frustrate ; be thy name writ on the sun.
May this world never lack thy head and crown,
This land thy host. From Cesar salutation,
From us praise to this famous king of earth.
May all be dark to one that joyeth not,
In his alliance. We have come from Rum
With gifts and tribute to this famous land,
Come with philosophers withal lest any
Should feel aggrieved at us. Let him accept
From Cesar goods and tribute and moreover
His blessing.”

Smiled the Shah upon that man
Of worship and they set for him a seat.
Khusrau Parwiz sent to the treasury .
The gifts and said to him: ‘ There needed not
Such pains ;” then to Kharrad, son of Barzin :—

Google

C. 1994
<pb n="376"/>
376 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

‘* Read out this letter to the company.”

The scribe, an eloquent and heedful man,
Scanned the address and said: ‘Tis ‘ to the great,
Exalt Khusrau Parwiz, that man of God,

The watchful ruler of a lovely land,

Whose crown and wisdom are God’s gifts to him,
The world-lord and the son of Shah Hurmuzd,
The glory of the crown and throne, from Cesar,
The father of the mother of the prince

Of lion-name,} and may his fame and power
Endure. Be his height, Grace, and victory,
And may his days be all a New Year’s Day.
May he rule o’er [ran and o’er Turan,

In sovereignty without competitor,

For ever glad in heart and bright in soul,

For ever old in wit and young in fortune.

The noble monarchy of Gaiimart,

The offspring of Hushang and Tahmuras,

Sire after sire, son after son, God grant

The stock ne’er fail. May holy God bless these,
The Mighty both in kingship and in Faith.

No horseman and no Spring 1s like to thee,
Like thee there is no picture in the halls ;

Thou hast all manliness and uprightness,

And may thy spirit look not on defeat.

In all fran, Turan, and Hindustan

From Turkistan to Rum, the sorcerers’ land,
God hath giv’n thee high birth with purity :

No holy mother e’er bare such a son.

When Faridin gave to fraj fran,

And took supremacy from Rum and Chin,?

He from the first acclaimed fraj and purged
His heart from guile and gloom. Thou hast no want,

2 Shirwi (Sherwi) from ‘ sher,’”’ a lion.
* Rum and Chin (Tur4n) were the portions of Salm and Tur,
the elder brothers of [raj. See Vol. i. p. 189.

Google
<pb n="377"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 377

Thy fortune prospereth, and thou wouldst say
That God bestoweth majesty and charm

And manhood upon thee and robbeth others

Of their renown for manliness. As patrons

Of virtue, noble, bountiful, no member

Of their race e’er saw trouble. Tax and tribute
They laid on foes, and their ill-wishers bare,

As oxen do, their burdens. Since the days

Of Nushirwan (may wisdom make him young
For evermore !), whose peer hath never been,
And ne’er will be, as Shah—the prudent king
By whom was reared a bulwark from the deep,?
So that they freed the whole wood of Narwan
From Turkmans and the folk reposed, so freed
A vast expanse from enemies amid

The benisons of lords and underlings,

While Arabs, Indians, and [ranians

Girt up their loins before him—from the sea

Of Chin up to the land of the Khazars,

And from Armenia to the Eastern? gate,

The nobles of Haital, Chach, Turkistan,

And Samarkand, although possessed of crowns,
Of Grace and splendour, all have been your lieges
Admittedly because the Shahs were sprung
From Faridun and others had no right.

By this affinity that I have now

Contracted with thee, and increased thereby
My greatness by my wisdom, I rejoice

As those athirst, or herbs sun-parched, at water.
Let the shrewd world-lord make me glorious,
And answer me this day. I ask the king

To grant a wish of mine. It is a matter

Of no account to him. Among thy treasures
There is the Cross of Christ : observe and ye
Will find it so. It hath been there for long.

2 See Vol. vii. p. 239. * From Cesar’s point of view.

Google

C. 1995
<pb n="378"/>
C. 1996

378 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Now let the Shah restore it and so doing
Confer a favour on us great and smal ;
Then all the world will bless him, saying thus :—
‘Let time and earth without him be no more.’
"Twill be a favour to me; I will pray
All day and three fourths of the night for him.
Let him accept the tribute, toll, and gifts
Sent by me to his folk, and in return
I will accept the Cross by way of thanks.
Ne’er may the wicked look upon thy face !
Our feasts and ritual will prove glorious,
Our Faith become resplendent in the world,
As will our holy day, our Sunday, God
Will everywhere be worshipped, and the sad
Will kiss the Cross and burn thereto much incense.
That time will be delightful to my heart,
For ye will purge your hearts of all the vengeance
That hath come down to us. from Faridun,
And privily possessed both Salm and Tur ;
Our realm will rest from forays and all feuds.
Our wives and children have been carried off,
In every way our hearts have been distressed,
But our affinity hath calmed the world,
And all insensate passions are appeased.
May the Creator bless thee and thy land.”

The Shah heard Cesar’s letter to the end
With secret joy; the days of mighty kings
Had been restored in him. He gave great praise
To Khanagi and said: “ Be thou no more
A stranger.”

They made ready for that worthy,

That man both shrewd and brave, as dwelling-place
Two halls delightsome, and provided him
With all things needful. Khanagi first viewed
The appointed dwelling, then rejoined the Shah,
And companied that worshipper of God

Google

<pb n="379"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 379

At feast and entertainment, wine and chase.
On this wise with the Shah a month they spent
In all good fellowship and much content.

§ 54
How Khusrau Parwiz answered Cesar’s Letter and
sent Gifts

Khusrau Parwiz wrote when the month had passed
A letter couched in wise and happy terms,
Beginning thus: “ The blessings of the Great

Be on the man who keepeth pure within,

Who seeth God’s work both in good and ill,

And feareth none beside but praiseth Him—

The Master of the sun—who thus sustaineth

The heavenly sphere: and first, thy praises of me,
As instanced in thy letter, I acknowledge,

And I am gratified that they proceed

From sages eminent. I have received

Thy splendid? treasure sent and only wish

That thou hadst less concerned thyself. Since God,
The holy Ruler of the world, hath raised

Thy realm o’er Spica, so as to outprize

Hind and Saklab, Chin and Khazar, what manhood,
What knowledge, virtue, and what Faith are thine,
And with God’s blessing! When I was in trouble
Thou didst assist me and remove my griefs

Most wisely. Now I am more gratified

In thine affinity and virtuous daughter

Than any other chief in child, in land,

And virtuous kin. The other chiefs all turned
Their backs on me and passed me by as vile,

' Reading with P.

Google
<pb n="380"/>
380 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

But thou didst take the place of sire to me,

C. 1997, And more. I recognise that thou hast been
A father noble and benevolent.
Next, what thou sayest of the holy Faith.
About your Sundays, fastings, and thanksgivings,
The scribe hath read to me. The words are both
Apt and acceptable, but still I shame not
For mine old Faith—Hushang’s—than which the

world

Hath seen naught better, teaching as it doth
All justice, goodness, reverence, and love,
With observation of the stars of heaven.
Sure am I that God is and ever strive
To follow justice. We do not allow
That God hath any partner, son, and consort.
He is and ever will be manifest,
Not comprehended by our thoughts but still
To me the warrant of His own existence.
Now as for these old tales recalled by thee
About the Cross of Christ: a well based Faith
Hath reason for its guide. Concerning those
Who, as thou say’st, are sad because their Prophet
Was crucified yet call Him ‘ Son of God,’
And say that on the Cross He laughed, if He
Was son He hath but gone back to his Father ;
Be not concerned about some rotten wood.
If foolish utterances proceed from Cesar
His letter will be laughed at by the old.
The Cross of Jesus, which Ardshir the Shah
Put in his treasury, is not worth the pains,
And if I send it from fran to Ram
The land will laugh at me, the archimages
Think that I have turned Christian and a priest
Upon Maryam’s account ! Demand of me
Whatever else thou wilt: the way is open.
I look with admiration on thy gifts,

Google
<pb n="381"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 381

For which thou hast encountered so much toil,
And have bestowed them on Shirwi that so
I might inaugurate his treasury.
I am concerned about [ran and Rim,
My thoughts all night are like a wood, I fear
That when Shirwi is grown mishap will come
Upon both lands. Beginning with great Salm,
Prolonged by that old vengeful Wolf Sikandar,
What with new feuds and old, the whole affair
Will be revived. In all things that thy daughter
Hath said to me know that she hath restored
Thy crown to youth. She is a Christian still,
And heedeth not my words. She is at ease
And joyful, triumphing in this voung Tree
Of royalty. The World-lord help thee ever ;
May fortune’s head be always on thy lap.”

They sealed the Ietter with the royal signet,
Kharrad, son of Barzin, took charge thereof,
And then they oped the doors of treasure-hoards
Collected by the Shah for many a day,
And in the first place eight score money-bags,
For coins which Persians call ‘* paidawasis,”}
They filled till they were hard as stones with jewels,
Then sealed them tightly. Every bag was worth,
According to the reckoning on the roll,
One hundred thousand drachms. There were besides
Of pieces of brocade from Chin one hundred
And forty thousand, some of cloth of gold
With jewelled patterns, and five hundred pearls
Of purest water and like water-drops,
With eight score jewels like pomegranate-seeds,
Such as a skilful jeweller would prize,
While of the native produce of each land,
Of Hindtstan and Chin, Barbar and Misr,
And raiment from Shustar—all that the chiefs

' See Vol. vil. p. 95 note.

Google

C. 1998
<pb n="382"/>
382 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Esteem—he sent three hundred camel-loads
To noble Cesar. He gave Khanagi
A grander robe of honour than he gave

To strangers or his kin, with garments, steeds,

Thrones, trappings, and all kinds of noted stuffs.

In this way too he made up camel-loads,
Ten out of them consisting of dinars

To give to the philosophers of Rim.

The embassy went on its way rejoicing,
While all the mighty men called down upon
That prowest king of earth their benison.

THE STORY OF KHUSRAU PARWIZ
SHIRIN

§ 55
The Prelude

Now will I tell again old histories

About Shirin and Shah Khusrau Parwiz.
The book containing them is antiquate,

But that same story bring I up to date

To serve as a memorial of the Great.

Six times ten thousand couplets there will be,
Well ordered, banishers of misery.

For thrice a thousand couplets one may look
In vain as yet in any Persian book,

And if one were to cancel each false strain
In sooth five hundred barely would remain.

. That one—a bounteous king and of such worth

And lustre mid the monarchs of the earth—
Should disregard these histories is due
To slanderers and mine ill fortune too.

Google

AND
<pb n="383"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 383

They envied this my work and with the king
They have prevailed to spoil my marketing ;
But when the royal potentate shall read

My pleasant histories with all good heed

I shall be gladdened by his treasures here,
And may no ill from foe approach him near.
My book may then recall me to his mind,

The seed of mine endeavours fruitage find.

Be his the crown and throne while time shall run,
And may his destiny outshine the sun.

A rustic minstrel wise and old once said :—
‘To know is that which giveth man most aid ;
The tale of grief and joy he needs must tell,
Taste all the bitter and the salt as well,

For youths though knowing and of noble birth
Can only by experience compass worth.’’!

§ 56

How Khusrau Parwiz loved Shirin, how they parted,

how he met her again while hunting and sent her
to his Bower?

Khusrau Parwiz like other paladins,

While yet his father lived, was young and bold,
And had for mate Shirfn who was to him

As his bright eyes. He cared for none beside
Among the fair and daughters of the night,?
But parted from her for a while when he

Came to be king and had to roam the world
Unrestingly, for all his work was then

To fight Bahram Chubina while the Fair

1 There is no break in the original here.
* Part of this heading is not in the original.
2 ‘les filles des grands.” Mohl.

Google

C. 1099
<pb n="384"/>
C. 2000

384 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

Wept day and night o’er his defect in love.!

It was so that one day he willed to hunt,
And all things were prepared as in the times
Of former Shahs. They took three hundred steeds,
Caparisoned with gold, for that famed King,
While of his loyal servitors there fared
Afoot a thousand and eight score, and carried
Two-headed darts. A thousand and two score
Bare scimitars and wore brocade above
Their coats of mail. Seven hundred falconers
Came next with royal falcons, sparrow-hawks,
And gos-hawks, while behind them mounted men—
Three hundred keepers of the cheetahs—fared,
And pards and lions chained three score and ten, |
All harnessed with brocade of Chin, all trained,
And furnished with gold muzzles. For the deer-hunt
There were eight hundred hounds with golden leashes.
Behind them came, to harp on hunting-days,
Two thousand minstrels all on camel-back,
And crowned with gold. Five hundred camels went
Ahead, and ’twas their special task to bear
The seats, pavilions, and tent-enclosures,
The tents and shielings for the quadrupeds.
There were two hundred slaves to kindle censers,
And to burn aloe-wood and ambergris
Therein. Before the Shah two hundred youths
Of those attending on him went with posies
Of saffron and narcissus that the scent
Might meet him from all quarters as he came,
Preceded by a hundred water-bearers
To sprinkle all the road, and thou hadst said :—
‘“ They pour rose-water over ambergris ”’
Lest any sudden blast might scatter dust
Upon that Shah of glorious lineage.
Three hundred youthful princes rode with him,

? The section in the original ends here.

Google
<pb n="385"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIz 385

Arrayed in yellow, red, and violet.
The king of kings had with him Kawa’s standard,
ore crown and earrings, royal cloth of gold,
A golden girdle, armlets, and a torque,
And jewelled buttons.
Now Shirin, on hearing :—
“The host, preceded by the mighty Shah,
Hath come,” put on a yellow vest musk-scented,
And made her Visage like pomegranate-blooms.
She wore a red robe of brocade from Rum
. With patterns jewelled on a ground of gold,
And placed upon her head a royal crown
Set with the jewels of a paladin.
She left her jocund hall, went on the roof,
And in her day of youth showed naught of joy,
But waited til] Khusrau Parwi{z arrived,
Then let the tear-drops fall upon her cheeks.
At sight of him she rose, showed all her height,
And spake to him with Sweetness of the past.
The twin Narcissi bathed the Cercis-bloom,
The first all languishment, the last all health,
All tears! and beauty, eagerly she cried
Thus in the olden tongue: ‘“O Shéh! Great Lion !
O framed to be leader of the host !
O blesséd hero, lion-conqueror !
Where is that love of thine? Where are the tears
Of blood once stanched by looking on Shirin ?
Where all those days which once we turned to nights,
Tears in our hearts and eyes, smiles on our lips ?
cre are our loves, our troth, our bonds, our oaths ? ”
E’en as she spake she shed blood-drops of gall
Upon her guise of lapis-lazuli,2
And when he heard and looked and saw Shirin
He wept for her, his face hued like the sun.
He sent a led horse all betrapped with gold,

* Or “ sheen,” * “sur son visage en deuil.”” Mohl.
VOL. VIII, 2B

Google

C.

2001
<pb n="386"/>
386 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And forty honest eunuchs, men of Rum,
To bear her to his golden bower, his house
Begemmed, then went to hunt with hawks and
cheetahs.

When he had had enough of hill and plain
He went back to the city joyfully.
They decked it and the roads because the Shah
Was coming from the chase; the trumpet-calls,
And sounds of singing, ravelled all the air,
And thus the royal Fruit of that tall Bough!
Passed through the city to his lofty home,
While from his bower Shifrin came forth and kissed
His feet and hands and head. At that time spake
The Shah to the high priest: “ Indulge no thoughts
Save good concerning us, bestow on me
This fair-cheeked lady as my lawful wife,
And publish the glad tidings to the world.”

So he espoused her in the ancient way
With all the rites and sanctions of his day.

§ 57

How the Nobles heard that Shirin had come to the Bower
of Khusrau Parwiz and how they advised him and
were satisfied with his Answer

Now when these tidings of Khusrau Parwiz

Came to the nobles and the host: ‘“ Shirin

Is in the Shah’s bower and the old affair

Hath been revived,” the city was aggrieved,

And full of care, distress, and malisons.

For three days none approached him. On the fourth,
When the world’s Lustre shone, he sent and called

1 The Sdsanian race. ‘‘ Lorsque cet homme 4 la stature royale
et aux membres pulssants.’”’ Mohl.

Google
<pb n="387"/>
KHUSRAU PARWiz 387

The chiefs and set them on the nobles’ Seats.

He said to them: « For days I have not seen you,
And grieve thereat. I am concerned for fear

Of your concernment and solicitous

About your dealings.”

Although his father called Dard his brother,
While Failakis was wont to call him son.2
When sire is pure and mother virtueless
Know that no holy son will come to birth.
None seeketh for uprightness in Perverseness
If he is fain to fill his sleeves with right.

Our hearts are sad because a potent diy

Is now the great king’s mate, for had there been
No other woman in frén e’en then

How could Khusrau Parwiz thus honour her ?
If but Shirin were absent from his bower

' Blood in the Original,
* In this and the Preceding line the Pronouns refer to Sikandar,

Google

C. 2c02
<pb n="388"/>
C. 2003

388 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

His face would be resplendent everywhere.
Thine ancestors, those wise and upright men,
Ne’er would have thought of this.”

When he had spoken
At great length, and the king of kings returned
No answer, he said thus: ‘* At dawn to-morrow
We will assemble here and haply have
The Shéh’s reply ; our talk was long to-day.”

Next day they rose at dawn and went to offer
Their service to the Shah, and some one said :—
“It is not right to speak such words,”’ another :—
** The words were wisdom’s mates,”’ a third: ‘‘ He will
Reply to-day, and what he saith should make
For happiness.”’

The archimages all

Set forward and with stately steps approached
The Shah. The magnates took their seats and then
A man came with a bowl all furbished bright
As Sol and passed before the chiefs in turn.
Now warm blood had been poured therein. He set
It gently by the Shah. All turned away
Their faces and the assembly was all talk.
Khusrau Parwiz looked on them and they quaked.
He said to the frdnians: ‘‘ Whose blood
Is this and wherefore is it set before me ?”’

** Tis noisome blood,” the archimage replied,
‘“* And so polluteth him that seeth it.”

When he had spoken thus men took the bowl,
Passed it from hand to hand, cleansed it of blood,
And scoured it out with water and with sand.
Then when that noisome bow! had been made bright
And clean, the washer filled it full of wine,

And sprinkled it with musk and with rose-water.
The bowl] shone out sun-bright. Khusrau Parwiz
Said to the archmage: “ Verily the bowl
Appeareth otherwise ! ”

Google
<pb n="389"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 389

The archmage said :—
“Live ever more! Good hath appeared from ill.
Thy bidding hath turned Hell to Paradise,
And from ill-doing good is manifest.”
** Shfrin,’? Khusrau Parwiz said, ‘‘to this city
Was e’en as this disgustful bowl of bane,
But in my bower she is a bowl of wine,
And savoureth as we. She first obtained
Her ill repute through me; she did not court
The friendship of the Great.”
All blessed him, saying :—
‘‘ May earth ne’er lack thy crown and throne. They
grow
In goodness whom thou makest good, and mighty
Are those whom thou hast made so in the world,
For to be Shah, archmage, and chief is thine,
And have withal on earth the Grace divine.”’

§ 58
How Shirin murdered Maryam and how Khusrau
Parwiz put Shirwt in Bonds

Thenceforth the greatness of the Shah increased,
And what had been a moon became a sun.

His days were spent with Cesar’s daughter; she
Was chief within his bower. Because of her
Shirin was sore, her cheeks were ever wan

With envy till at last she gave her bane,

And Cesar’s lovely daughter ceased to be.

None wotted of the trick because Shirin

Kept her own counsel, and Khusrau Parwiz
Gave her the gilded chamber when Maryam
Had been deceased one year.

Google
<pb n="390"/>
C. 2004

390 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Now when Shirwi
Was sixteen years of age, and in his stature
O’ertopped the men of thirty, his sire brought
The erudite to educate the prince,
While by command an archimage maintained
A kindly watch upon him day and night.
It happened that the archimage one morn
Went to his patron’s and returning found
Shirwf as usual occupied in sport,
Saw that he had in front of him Kalila
And Dimna! but that the fierce youth was holding
In his left hand a wolf’s claw cut and dried,
And in his right a buffalo’s horn, and these
He beat together as the humour took him.
Such actions, pastime, and behaviour
Vexed the archmage’s heart who boded ill
From that wolf’s claw, the buffalo’s horn, and manners
Of that rude youth, and was in great concern
At what might happen through that ill-disposed
And luckless prince in times to come for he |
Had seen the horoscope and made inquiries
Of minister and treasurer. He sought
The high-priest and reported thus to him :—-
‘* This youth is wholly given up to play.”
The high-priest went at once and told the Shah,
Who kept a careful eye upon his son,
On whose account his ruddy cheeks grew pale
In trouble for the future of the world.
His heart was full of pain, his liver ached
At what the readers of the stars had told him.
He said: ‘I wait the Lord of Heaven’s will.”
When twenty-three years of the reign had passed,
And when Shirwi had gotten stalwart limbs,
The Great King was displeased because the child
Was lusty grown but not as he desired.

1 See Vol. vii. pp. 382, 423.

Google
<pb n="391"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 391

The monarch’s mind, which else had been all smiles,
Was pained thereat, and he confined the youth

To his own palace with a foster-brother,

Disgraced on his account, and all that were
Attached to him or went to him for counsel :

There were above three thousand more or less.
Their palaces, connected each with each,

Were as a whole the prison of Shirwi.

They decked, draped, carpeted, and furnished them
With provand and the means of giving largess,

With male and female slaves, with wine and minstrels.

The place was all dinars. The inmates passed
Their time in song and feast while forty men
Kept guard.

And now as episodes recite
Tales told by men who thought and spake aright.

§ 59
How Khusrau Parwiz made the Throne of Tékdis

Of that throne which thou knowest as Takdf{s,
And which Khusrau Parwiz set up within

The hippodrome, the origin occurred

Beneath Zahhak—that loathly infidel—

For when heroic Faridun came forth,

And from the Arabs carried off the style

Of kingship, on Mount Damawand there dwelt
A man who was distinguished by the Shah.
His name was Jahn, son of Barzin, a power
Within the realm, and for that Shah renowned
He made a throne and studded it with gems,
So that Shah Farfdun rejoiced o’er him

When that grand throne was finished, and bestowed
Drachms thirty thousand with a golden crown,
And pair of earrings on him, and had written

Google

C. 2005
<pb n="392"/>
392 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

On his behalf a patent for Sarf,
And for Amul. The coast-lands thus assigned
Resembled Paradise. When Farfduin
Bestowed [ran upon fraj—the youngest
Of his illustrious sons—he gave withal
Three things—this very throne, the ox-head mace
To serve as his memorial in the world,
And thirdly what the just Shah used to term
‘The Seven Founts ’’—a jewel. When [raj
Departed these were left and Mintchihr
Had joy thereof. Each wearer of the crown
Made some addition to that throne, and when
It came to Kai Khusrau, the fortunate,
He added greatly to its height. It passed
In due succession to Luhrasp and so
On to Gushtasp who, when he saw it, cried :—
“The work of mighty men must not be hidden,”’
And to Jamasp that man of worship said :—
What canst thou add to this achievement ? Scan
It everywhere and see what supplement
Thereto will win us praises after death.”

Jamasp beheld the throne and saw therein
A key wherewith to open wisdom’s door.
Upon it he inscribed the heavenly host,
Which hold the secrets of futurity,
And there portrayed by order of the Shah
The planet-forms from Saturn to the moon.
The throne thus reached the era of Sikandar,
Each Shah that looked upon it adding somewhat—
Gold, silver, ivory, and ebony—
Until through ignorance at one fell swoop
Sikandar broke it up; howbeit the nobles
Concealed and handed down full many a shard.
Thus was it till Ardshir began his reign,
And then the name e’en had grown obsolete.

1Cf. Vol. ii. p. 27.

Google
<pb n="393"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 393

He found no traces and so made another,
Not as he would, and had small joy therein.
He died and left it as thereafter did
Those that succeeded. When Khusrau Parwiz
Sat on the throne and all the chiefs were loyal
They spake about that other royal throne,
And its past history. Thus said the Shah :—
‘Ye chiefs! I ask a favour of my lieges
So that I may remake that throne renowned
To keep my name in mind. I need the plan
Drawn by Jamasp—the favourite of the sky
The one adopted by Gushtasp, the Shah,
Assisted by Jamasp’s advice and skill.”

An archimagus reproduced the plan
Whereat the exalt Khusrau Parwiz was glad,
And, this obtained, made haste to reconstruct
With joy the throne, brought forth that of Ardshir,
And gathered all the craftsmen of fran.
So in the days of that victorious Shah
They reconstructed that resplendent throne.
The artificers came out of Rim and Chin,
Makran, Baghdad, and from Iran itself.
Of craftsmen there were one and sixty score,
Intent upon the fashioning thereof,
And each had thirty workers under him—
Men out of Rum, Pars, and Baghdad. The Shah
Commanded all to labour earnestly
To have the throne completed in two years,
And when it was set up high fortune shone.
The height thereof was five score royal cubits?
If thou wilt add thereto three score and ten;
The breadth six score for twas less broad than high.
A different carpet was laid down each morning
Throughout the month,* and seven score thousand

plaques

' A royal cubit=a fathom. * Couplet omitted.

Google

C. 2006
<pb n="394"/>
C.

2007

394 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Of gold with patterns fashioned of turquoise
Were set upon the throne, while every nail

And clamp were solid silver; each of them
Weighed sixty-six miskals. When Sol displayed
Its lamp in Aries the desert lay

Behind the throne which fronted garden-wards,
But when Sol raged in Leo then the back

Was turned toward it ;! in the month of Tir—
The time for fruit and festival—the throne
Stood fronting toward the garden and the fruits
To catch their scents ; in Winter, in the days
Of wind and wet, none felt them seated thus ;
The top was all shut in right royally

With beaver-skins and sables. A thousand balls
Withal of gold and silver glowed like brands?
Upon the fire, each five and twenty score
Miskals in weight and coral-hued with heat.

One half was in the fire, the other half

Was turned towards the noble warriors.

The host of heaven, planets, Zodiac,

The bright moon in whatever Sign soe’er,

And all the bodies, fixed or wandering,

Were visible to the astronomer,

Who saw what portion of dark night had passed,
And how much sky had moved athwart the earth.
Among these tables some were made of gold,
And what a wealth of jewels was therein !

Not e’en an expert could compute their tale.
The cheapest ran to some three score dinars

And ten; seven hundred would not purchase some,
So strike an average. Full many a ruby

Was there whose value none could estimate :
They lit the night like Venus in the sky.

Upon the throne-steps were three rows of seats

' The sun.
* ** Les valets de garde-robe faisaient chauffer au feu,’’ etc. Mohl.

Google
<pb n="395"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 395

Enriched with gems. From one row to the next

There were four steps of gold inlaid with Jewels.

One row, whose ornaments were shaped like heads

Of rams, took thence its name; the next above

Was known as “ Lapis-lazuli ” as higher

Than wind or dust-clouds, while the third was al]

Turquoise, and every one that saw it burned

With longing. Rural chiefs and underlings

Sat on the Rams’ Heads’ row while cavaliers—

Men un-affeared upon the day of battle—

Sat on the cirque of lapis-lazuli.

The turquoise seat was for the minister

That was engaged in governing the realm,

And he that sat there must be wise and loyal.

A fabric was Spread out of cloth of gold

Two score and seventeen cubits long, its fringe

All strung with jewels held by golden threads.

A map of heaven was inscribed thereon

Where Saturn, Mars, Sol, Jupiter,! and Venus,

With Mercury and shining Luna, showed

The fortunes of the Shah ; there too appeared

The Seven Climes, and peers of Pars and Rum ;?

The seven and forty Shéhs,? their faces, thrones,

And crowns, were shown, those of the kings of
kings,

Of woven gold. The fabric was unique.

A man of Chin, unrivalled in such work,

Had given seven years to weaving it.

One New Year at Urmuzd of Farwardin

He came before the monarch of fran,

And brought that royal carpet to the Shgh :

The nobles let him pass. He laid it down

On New Year’s Day. The Shah's joy was complete.
* Reading with P. * Id.
* Khusrau Parwiz himself was only the forty-third Shah. Shah,

however, may be used here in a more general sense so as to embrace
Siy4wush, Asfandiy4r, and others. Mohl has “ quarante-huit.”’

Google

C.

2008
<pb n="396"/>
396 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

That carpet gave an opportunity
For mirth: they called for wine and minstrelsy.

§ 60
The Story of Sarkash and Bdrbad, the Minstrel, and

Khusrau Parwiz

There was a minstrel who was named Sarkash—
An expert—who acclaimed the king of kmgs
With all felicitations on the harp,
While nobles showered jewels over him,
And hailed him as the Grace of majesty,
What while the Shah grew greater year by year.

Now in the nine and twentieth of his kingship,
When none fared ill at court, Barbad heard tell
Thereof, for all folk said to him: ‘ The world-lord
Affecteth minstrelsy in private life,
And thou, if thou wert introduced to him,
Wouldst overtop Sarkash.”

Thereat the man

Becaine ambitious and though well to do
Departed to the Shah's court from his province,
And noted all the minstrels there. Sarkash,
On hearing him perform, was vexed at heart,
And, all confounded at such minstrelsy,
Approached the audience-chamberlain, bestowed
A present on him of dinars and drachms,
And said: “ There is a minstrel at the gate,
Who is my better both in years and skill.
He must not come before Khusrau Parwiz
For I am waxing old and he is voung.”

The keeper of the door, on hearing this,
Refused the new musician audience,

And so Barbad, whenever he approached,

Google
<pb n="397"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 397

Found his employment and his profit nil.

When he despaired of being heard he sought

The royal pleasance with his harp. The gardener,

A man by name Mardwi, revived his hopes,

Because at the New Year the Shah was wont

To hold a two weeks’ feast within that pleasance.

Barbad approached Mardwi forthwith, became

Friends that same day and said : “‘ Thou wouldest say

That we are soul and body. I desire

A boon—the merest trifle. When the world-lord

Shall come to revel hither give to me

The means of seeing him, myself unseen.’’?
Mardwi replied: “‘ I will; my love for thee

Shall oust reflection.” :

When the Shah took order

For visiting the garth the gardener’s heart

Was like a shining lamp. He went and told

Barbad: ‘‘ The Shah is coming to the pleasance.”’
Barbad dressed all in green and took his harp,

Prepared to sing of glory and of war,

And went to where the Shah would be who had

Each Spring a fresh spot for his festival.

There was a verdant cypress full? of leaf,

Whose branches, like the battle of Pashan,

Extended far and wide. With harp on breast

The minstrel climbed it and abode until

The king came from his palace to the pleasance :

The gardener had the spot in readiness.

There came a fay-faced reveller with wine

While in the monarch’s hand there was a cup ;

The world-lord took the liquor from the youth ;

Its crimson made the crystal disappear.

Now when the sun turned sallow, but abode

1 Couplet omitted.

* Gashan. Firdausi might have used this adjective as a thyme-
word in his alleged competition with the three poets (see Vol. ui.
p-. 15) but preferred the more erudite Pashan.

Google

C. 2009
<pb n="398"/>
C. 2910

3098 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Until night turned to lapis-lazuli,
The minstrel in that cypress took his harp,
And sang a royal ditty. In that tree
He sang a lay so charming that the Shah,
That man of wakeful fortune, was amazed.
The melody which that sweet voice gave forth
Was that which now thou callest Dadafrid.}
The company were in astonishment,
And everyone had his own view thereon.
The playing made Sarkash like one insane ;
He recognised the source, but held his peace,
And thought: °* None but Barbad can play like this,
Or knoweth thus the song of paladins.”
The Shah gave orders to his lords: ‘ Search all
The pleasance.”’
They searched long and came again,
While shrewd Sarkash observed : ‘‘ No marvel 'tis,
So fortune-favoured is the Shah, that rose
And cypress-tree should serve him as musicians.
For ever may his head and crown endure.”
Then the cup-bearer brought another cup,
And as the king received it from the youth,
So fair of face, the minstrel preluded
In other fashion and forthwith began
A different song—that called Paikar-1-Gurd,?
A name suggested by the words. The minstrel |
Sang and the Shah gave ear, drank to the voice, |
And bade: ‘* Produce this man and all within
The garden.” |
So they searched the garden through, !
And carried lights beneath the trees, but saw
Naught but the willows and the cypresses,
And pheasants pacing underneath the rose.

' “The Source of Justice.”’
* The Battle of the Brave.’ This and the preceding are musical
terms.

Google
<pb n="399"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 399

The king of kings called for another cup,

And raised his head to hear the voice. Again
There came the singing to another tune

Upon the harp—the tune called Sabz dar sabz,}

A melody employed in magic arts.

On hearing it Khusrau Parwiz arose,

And that adorner of the garth demanded

A cup of wine that held a man.? He drank

The sparkling wine off at a draught and cried :—
‘* An angel this, all musk and ambergris,

For if he were a div he would not sing,

Or know to play the harp !° Find out the player.
Search all the garden and the flower-beds

To left and right, for I will fill his mouth

And lap with gems, and he shall be chief minstrel.”

Now when the singer heard the monarch’s voice,
And speech so kind and welcome, he descended
The branches of the straight-stemmed ecvpress, fared
Glad and triumphant, came and laid his face
Upon the dust. Khusrau Parwiz said: “ Speak.
What man art thou ?”’

**O Shah! a slave am I,”
He answered, “ and live only by thy voice.”

He told all that had happened from the first,
And who had been his friend. The king rejoiced,
Like roses in the Spring-tide to behold him,

Then spake thus to Sarkash: “ Unskilful one,
Like colocynth while he is sugar-like !

Why didst thou bar his access to me thus ?
Thy harp is banished from this company.”

Then while Barbad sang on the monarch quaffed,
And drained the Jewelled cup until his head

' “Green on green,” anticipating Marvell's ‘“‘ green thought in a
green shade.”’ Also a musical term.

* See Vol. i. p. 290 nole.

> In the earher parts of the Shahnama divs sometimes are repre-
sented as being accomplished. See Vol. i. p. 127, Vol. i. p. 31.

Google
<pb n="400"/>
Cc. 2011

400 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

Inclined to sleep, whereat with watered pearls

He filled the singer’s mouth. Barbad became

Chief minstrel and renowned among the great.
The epoch of Barbad hath past and gone :

May ill be never thy companion,

For since the day will pass alike of chief,

And underling, why should the sage eat grief ?

Full many have gone—both chief and underling—

And I from slumber wish no wakening.

When six and sixty years have passed of life

It is not good for one to be at strife.

When I have ended these my famous lays

The country-side will echo with my praise.

Thenceforth for me not death but life shall last,

For I have flung the seed of words broad-cast,

And all of Faith, of counsel, and sound lore

Will sing my praise when I shall be no more.

§ 61
How Khusrau Parwiz built the Palace! of Mad@in

I will retell the tale of Mada’in,

Tell of the palace of Khusrau Parwiz.

A Persian shrewd of heart, o’er whom had passed
Years four times thirty, said: Khusrau Parwiz
Sent men to Rim, Hind, Chin, and other lands
Inhabited, and from all climes there came
Three thousand famed artificers, of whom

He chose two hundred—masters of their craft,
Who knew the use of bricks and mortar well—
Out of fran, Ahwaz, and from the Ruimans.

Of these he next chose thirty and from them

1 City in text.

Google
<pb n="401"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ yor

Two Rimans and one Persian, from which three
They chose a Riman matchless in the world.
That expert came before Khusrau Parwiz,

And held discourse of plan and elevation.

That Riman worshipful, that scientist
Surpassed in speech the Persian. Said the Shah :—
‘** Accept this contract at my hands and heed
These mine instructions: I require a building
Such that although my sons and race shall dwell
Therein for many a year it will not fall

To ruin through the rain or snow or sun.”

The expert undertook the Shah’s commission,
And said: ‘‘ For this thing I am competent.”

Ten royal cubits deep he excavated,

(A royal cubit is five common ones)?

And laid foundations made of stone and mortar
To form a solid basis. When the walls
Belonging to the palace had been reared

He came bcfore the master of the world,

And said: ‘“‘ Let now the Shah appoint a man,
Exceeding wise and well advanced in years,
And send out to the works this man approved
Together with some trusty archimages.”’

The Shah appointed men as he was asked,
Who went and made inspection of the walls.
The artist brought silk which the company
Turned to a slender cord by twisting it.

Then from the wall-top of the royal palace
He measured to the level of the ground,
And after measuring the twisted cord

In presence of the Shah’s commissioners

He took it to the royal treasury,

And having sealed it gave it to the keeper ;
Then going to the court said to the Shah :—
** The palace-walls have risen to the moon,

1 Reading with P. and T.
VOL. VIII, 2C

Google
<pb n="402"/>
402 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

C. 2012 But though the Shah bade: ‘ Haste!’ I will not urge

The work for forty days but let it settle.
The Shah selected me, and when the time
Is ripe the palace-wall shall be as Saturn.
Let not the Shah’s wrath aggravate my toils.”’

Khusrau Parwiz replied: ‘‘ Why askest thou
Such a delay from me, thou malcontent ?
Thou must not stop the work but shalt not want
For gold or silver.”’

By the Shah’s command
They gave the artist thirty thousand drachms
Lest he should take it ill. That honest workman
Knew that experts would blame him when he built
The palace hastily and, if it fell,
That he himself would lose his livelihood.
That night he disappeared ; none saw him more.
Khusrau Parwiz when told: ‘ Farghan hath fled,”’
Poured out upon the speaker all his wrath,
And said: “ How could a dullard give himself
Such airs before me ? ”’
Then he bade: ‘ Survey

The work and put in prison all the Rumans.”’

He said moreover: *‘ Bring artificers,

And gather mortar, stones, and massive bricks.”’
Albeit those that viewed the walls took flight
Both from the Shah and realm, and he was forced
To leave the work alone and turned his thoughts

Upon Ahwaz if haply he might find

An architect that such an enterprise

Might not continue headless very long.

He sought for one for three years but they found
None of surpassing worth, and people still
Talked much about the former architect,

Who in the fourth year reappeared. A man

Of prudence and of Grace divine informed
Khusrau Parwiz and presently the Ruman

Google
<pb n="403"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 403

Himself came swift as dust.
‘** Thou criminal ! ”’

The Shah said, “‘ say what disability
Was in the work to make thee lose both wealth
And Paradise ? ”’

The Ruman said: “ If now
The king will send me with a trusty man
I will explain to him about my doings,
And pardon will ensue on explanation.”’

The Shah dispatched them and they left the palace,
The noble artist and king’s confidant.
The clever Raman took the measuring-line,
And with the Shah’s own representative
Tried the wall’s height and found that it had sunk
Seven cubits. Then they carried to the Shah
The line. The expert’s comrade made report.
The Ruman then spake thus: “ If I had carried
The buildings to their height no wall, O Shah!
No vaulting and no work had stood, and I
Could not have.stayed at court.”
Khusrau Parwiz

Saw that he spake, as all should do, the truth,
Freed those in prison, whether ill-disposed
Or innocent, and gave the architect
Ten purses of dinars and to the imprisoned
Full many a gift. Thus much time passed away.
The Shah was eager for the work’s completion,
And after seven years it was achieved,
And was approved by wise Khusrau Parwiz,
Who gave the architect much honour, land,
Dinars and drachms and praise. All went to view
That palace, and the Shah was wont to spend
His New Year there. None ever saw a structure
Like that or heard from famous architects
Of such. A ring of gold cast for the purpose
Hung from the ceiling of the cupola,

Google

C. 2013
<pb n="404"/>
404 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS?

And from the ring a chain of ruddy gold
With jewelled links. Whene’er the king of kings
Ascended to his throne of ivory
They used to hang the crown upon this chain,
And when he took his seat on New Year’s Day
The nearest were the favoured archimages,
The next below the chiefs, the mighty men,
And commissaries, lower down the merchants
And other traders, lower still the poor,
And those that laboured for their daily bread,
And, lowest, many maimed in hand or foot,
Or cast down mangled at the palace-gate.
Then from the hall would proclamation come
That used to stir all hearts: ‘‘ All ye that are
The subjects of the monarch of the world !
Be not heart-darkened and dispirited.
The cares of all that look up to this height
Shall end, but look beyond the royal throne,
And take ye all the lieges in account.”

Then no one, whether innocent or not,
Was still retained in bondage by the Shah,
Who used to clothe his prisoners withal
From head to foot and give to them dinars
And gifts of all kinds, while all mendicants
Within the city that received no share
On New Year’s Day he seated at his gate,
And flung drachms to them from the treasury.
Ill-doers used to fear him, drowsiheads
Grew vigilant while proclamation issued,
Whenas the time for leaving had arrived :—

C. 2014 ‘“* Famed, high-born chiefs ! why seek so for addition ?
Your first concern should be your health and safety.
Consider what ye do and ne’er distress
The diffident, reflect then act, and heed
The sayings of the wise. Regard inferiors,

For those of luckless lives demand our tears.

Google

<pb n="405"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 405

A man may slumber at my very throne
Unharmed by me if he shall keep the path,
But those that clutch at others’ goods, on all
That do such things our anger shall befall.”’

§ 62

Discourse on the Splendour and Greatness of Khusrau
Parwiz

The greatness of the Shah I next display,
And give new freshness to a bygone day,
Such majesty that mid the small and great
There is no memory of equal state.
Well may the reader of the roll of kings
Shake from his skirts all transitory things,
And well may I too say a word for I
Am well assured of sages’ sympathy.
Be not at home in this world for its bane
Is greater than its antidote; refrain
From greed and strife; make not life’s stage to be
Thy home, ’tis but a wayside inn for thee.
Fare on. Thou agest and the young anon
Arrive ; this cometh, that one passeth on :
Awhile they strut or batten and are gone,
For lion’s head and elephant’s both must,
The signal given, come alike to dust.
When thou hast heard from me the wondrous tale
About Khusrau Parwiz keep it in mind.
He had such puissance and eminence,
Such majesty, such Grace, such throne and crown,
That, though thou ask of experts, thou wilt hear
Of no one greater. From Turan and Hind,
From Chin and Rum and every peopled clime

Google
<pb n="406"/>
C. 2015

Google

406 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI!I

They brought him tribute night and day alike—

Boy-slaves and girl-slaves out of every court,

And pearls and gems. His treasures and dinars

Were infinite ; there was no king like him.

The wingéd eagle, royal falcon, hawk,

Pard, lion, and stream-haunting crocodile

Submitted to him willingly : his mind

Was bright as Sol. The first of all his treasures,

Amassed from Chin, Bulghar, from Rum, and Rus,

Was called “ ’Arts ”’ ;} the next of watered pearls,

And in an edifice a bowshot high,

Was named “ Khazra *? by chiefs and Arab sages ;

The next was known as “ Bar’ and lord and liege

Have never looked upon its like; the next

Was great Shadward‘ which minstrels celebrate ;

The next was that which men called ‘“‘ Bad Awar °’;5

They strove to estimate it but they failed.

The next whereof thou hearest speak thou callest

‘** Diba-i-Khusraui,’’® and next the famed

Hoard of Afrasiyab; none hath possessed

Its like by sea or land; another hoard

Was that entitled ‘‘ Sukhta ’’’ and its lustre

Illumed the realm. Sarkash was of his minstrels ;

So was Barbad ; that market never failed |

Khusrau Parwiz, and in his golden bower

There were twelve thousand girls like jocund Spring.

He had twelve hundred elephants of war ;

Thou wouldst have said: “‘ Earth hath not room for
them.”

The war-steeds in the stables of the king |

Were six and forty thousand, while of camels |

Red-haired® there were ten thousand, and none

then
» The Bride. * The Green. *# Perhaps ‘‘ The Spring... (of
‘ The Throne. Khusrau).”’ Cf. NT, p. 355, mote.
* Windfall, t.e. composed of jetsam. Cf. ZT, it. 305.
* Brocade of Khusrau. 7. Weighed. * The best sort.

<pb n="407"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 407

Possessed one like to them. Twelve thousand more
Were beasts of burden, sixty-six were swift
For litter-bearing ; none had seen or heard
Of such from white-haired veterans. Of troopers
There were a thousand thousand—men of Rum,
Of Chin and Turkistan. He had withal
Shabdiz, the charger that ne’er failed in fight,
While in his women’s bower there was Shirin
To add her lustre to his Rosary.

Since he was ruined by a servitor
Be not solicitous in quest for more,
But rather choose a life exempt from care
If thou wouldst have just praises for thy share,
For good and evil pass away with death, _
And time is counting up our every breath.
What though thou gainest as thy portion here
Throne, crown, and treasury, though thy career
Be ever so laborious, vet at last
Thy lot among the bricks and dust is cast,
So sow but seed of good. Khusrau Parwiz
Should furnish thee with ample instances :
When thou shalt read the roll ’twill startle thee.
The famous throne, the seat of sovereignty,
Might and the diadem of empiry,
Were not sufficient for him but he must
Raise from [ran and from Turan the dust !

8 63

How Khusrau Parwiz turned from Justice, how the
Chiefs revolted, and how Gurdz called in Caesar

The Shah, who had been just, became unjust, C. 2016
Joyed in the injustice of his underlings,

Google

<pb n="408"/>
408 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Robbed all men of their goods and stirred up strife
"Twixt. man and man. That which had been a
blessing
Turned to a curse because the Ram grew like
A tyrannous Wolf. He undertook new toils,
His one desire was to increase his hoards,
Until the folk, who lacked both bread and water,
And had not e’en their bodies for their own,
Betook them to the country of the foe ;
The oppressed although unwilling left the land.
There was a worthless man by name Guraz,
Through whom the Shah enjoyed both ease and
pleasure.
He kept a constant surveillance o’er Rum,
And was div-headed, tyrannous, accursed.
Now when the once just Shah became unjust
This man was first to turn against Iran.
Another was the favourite, Farrukhzad ;
None could approach Khusrau Parwiz unless
Through him, and as the king of kings drew near
His end this man too grew corrupt. He came,
This offspring of Azar Makdén, a man
Of louring face and gruff with underlings,
And grew confederate with old Guraz
Till province after province was involved.
Guraz, who was the general, wrote to Cesar,
And stirred him up to mischief, saying thus :—
‘Arise and seize [ran. I will be first
In aiding thee.”
Then Cesar mustered troops
For battle, beat the tymbals, paid his host,
And marched like wind toward the [ranian coast.

Google
<pb n="409"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 409

§ 64

How Cesar withdrew through an Expedient of Khusrau
Parwiz and how the Chiefs released Shirwt from Bonds

The king, on hearing, took this grave case lightly.
He recognised the practice of Guraz
In prompting warlike Cesar and recalled him,
But he excused himself and disregarded
The royal letter, for the villain feared
Khusrau Parwiz, the court, and all the chiefs.
The king of kings sat with the Great and all
That were the men of leading in Iran.
He plunged his heart in thought and sought at large
- Among all manner of expedients,
And when a bright thought came to him he wrote
Thus to Guraz: “I quite approve thy conduct,
And have commended thee before the lords.
This artifice surpasseth all, for thou
Hast caused the fall of Caesar. When they bring thee
This letter set thy sharpest wits to work,
Wait till I make a move, then move thyself
That Cesar being placed between our hosts
May have his purpose foiled. We will convey him,
And all his Rimans, captives to fran.”
Then from his court he chose one of resource,
Informed and eloquent, as there was need,
And said: “ Convey this letter secretly,
As if thou wert a spy, but so contrive
That Rumans may observe thee on the road,
Interrogate and carry thee to Casar,
Or else before the captain of the host. .
He will inquire: ‘Whence art thou? Speak.’
Reply :—
‘A subject and in straits. I have been facing

Google

C. 2017

<pb n="410"/>
C. 2018

410 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

Toil and the longsome road to bear Guraz
A letter.’ Have this bound to thy nght hand,
And if he take it from thee it is well.”

The courier went forth from Khusrau Parwiz,
And made the letter fast to his right arm.
A scout descried him as he drew anear,
And carried him to Cesar with his head
All dust, with wan cheeks, and with livid lips.
Then Cesar asked: “ Where is Khusrau Parwiz ?
Thou must declare the truth.”

The embarrassed liege,
O’erwhelmed with fear, replied with favour changed.
Said Cesar: “ Search this wretch malevolent,
Ill-purposed and ill-faced.”’
Shrewd, skilful men

Searched him and took the letter from his arm,
Then sought a learned chieftain of that march,
One who could read aright the ancient tongue.
Now when that scribe had read the letter over
The monarch’s countenance became like pitch,
And thus he said in private to his troops :—
‘* Guraz intended to destroy us all !
The king of kings with countless elephants
And treasure, and three hundred thousand men,
Was minded to involve me in his net:
God grant his heart and policy be darkened ! ”’

He dropped his purpose and withdrew his host.
Guraz, informed that Cesar had returned
To Rum, grew pale and sorrowful. He chose
A horseman from his troops and wrote this letter
With sighs and loud complainings: ‘ Why is Cesar
Displeased with me? Say wherefore hast thou

quitted

fran and made me shift thus for myself ?
The king of kings, informed of what I did,
In pain and vengeance is estranged from me.”

Google
<pb n="411"/>
KHUSRAU PARWI!Z 41l

When Cesar was aware of this and saw
That letter he selected from his host
A noble and dispatched him to Guraz
In haste to say : “* Hath God so furnished thee
That thou shouldst desolate my crown and throne,
And burn my troops with fire ? Thy former letter,
Thou miscreant ! came but to consign to wind
My treasure, and the purpose was to give me
Up to Khusrau Parwiz. May good estate
And greatness ne’er be thine! Thou shouldst have

known
That while they see a Shah of royal race
The franians will desire no alien, |
None born of Cesar, none however wise.”’

Guraz protested unto Cesar much,

But failed to gain an acccess to his ear.
Khusrau Parwiz then chose as messenger
A Persian who was learned and eloquent,
And sent him with this letter to Guraz :—
‘Thou worthless villain, worker for the Div!
These many times I summon thee to Court,
But thou art far from loyalty and right.
Now all the army that thou hast with thee,
For many years thy fortune’s fosterers,

Are backing Cesar both in heart and will,
And privily are not as they appear.
Dispatch to me the disaffected rebels.”’

When this arrived the wary chieftain mused.
He chose twelve thousand valiant cavaliers,
And thus addressed them: “Be ye one in heart,
And heed ye not what any one may say.

Abide awhile on this side of the stream,
And hurry not at all upon the march.
If ye are one in tongue and confidence
Ye may uproot a mountain.”

Young and old

Google
<pb n="412"/>
412 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSt

Advanced as far as Khurra-i-Ardshir,!

C. 2019 Advanced until they reached the river-bank,
Expectant of the bidding of the king,
Who, hearing, was not anxious to behold them,
But ordered Farrukhzaéd to go and say :—
** Till now ye have been loyal ; wherefore then
Allowed ye Cesar to invade us thus ?
Who hath transgressed the way of God and quitted
The path of duty and of loyalty ? ”

The faces of the soldiers at that message,

Sent by Khusrau Parwiz, grew dark with fear.
None dared to speak but tarried pained and pale.
The messenger was with Guraz at heart,

But kept his secret both from wind and dust.

He then approached the leaders privily,

And threw some light upon their darkened minds.
“* Fear not,” he said, “‘ ye chieftains! for the Shah
Hath not detected you in open fault.

Be of one heart and tongue, and say to him :—

* What disaffected person is with us ?

And if there be one cloak is over all;

We stand by one another lustily.’ ”

The chiefs all heard him, understood, rose up,
And framed their answer on the lines proposed.
Then Farrukhzad returned like flying dust,

And told the Shah their words, who said: ‘*‘ Go back,
And say: * Which of you seeketh his own hurt ?
The man that hath been duped by luckless Cesar
With gifts of treasures, weapons, crowns, and thrones,
That man is guilty in respect to us—

A traitor to this crown and majesty.

Dispatch ye to my court without delay

All that are disaffected in this wise,

Else all of you that have transgressed shall see

' Khurra-i-Ardshir was a district in Pars. Bih-Ardshfr (Seleucia)
must be meant.

Google

<pb n="413"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 413

The gibbet and the dungeon.’ ”’
Farrukhzad
Went with these words, and in the soldiers’ hearts
Old grievances revived. None dared to speak,
But kept a mournful silence. Thereupon
Spake Farrukhzad and in unseemly words :—
“Tn all this young and valiant host I see
None inefficient ; why then fear the Shah,
Whose troops are scattered through the world ? I note
At court no great man to illuminate
His star and moon. Despise my words and fear not
My threats, but curse me and the exalted Shah.”
The hearers knew: ‘ The fortune of the king

Hath aged,” and framed their lips for malisons,
While Farrukhzad went to Khusrau Parwiz,
And said: ‘“ The troops all stand by one another,
And if thou sendest me again I fear
For mine own life.”

Khusrau Parwiz perceived :—
“This knave will cause both blood and tears to

flow,”

But fearful of his brother! answered not,
And hid the truth; for Rustam had revolted
Where he was stationed with ten thousand swordsmen,
And holding Farrukhzad disloyal too
Caused his own soldiers to revolt withal,
While Farrukhzad was ware too that the Shah
Knew him as author of the host’s default ;
So when that malcontent had left the presence
He dared not to return but kept without,
And tampered there with all the folk, for ever
Attempting to pervert them, man by man,
From their obedience to the Shah. He told
Them all and they agreed: “ Another Shah

» Rustam, the brother of Farrukhzad not of Khusrau Parwiz as
given in the Genealogical Table of the Sasanians in Vol. vi. p. 3.

Google

C. 2020

<pb n="414"/>
414 THE SHAHNAMA OF FRIDAUSI

Should sit upon the throne for this hath lost
The Grace, the royal usages, and fortune.”

There was with Farrukhzaéd an ancient man,
Skilled in affairs, who said: “‘ The Shah imputeth
The army’s fault to thee. Thou must produce
A new king soon because our fertile land
Is growing waste, its tumult as destructive
As was Piran. We needs must ascertain
Which of the Shah’s sons hath most modesty,
And will cause least dispute. He must be seated
Upon the throne as Shah and o’er his crown
Dinars be showered. Then we shall fare anew;
We have drunk bitter and we shall drink sweet,
For since Shirwi,! the shrewd and eldest-born,

Is now in prison we shall need no other.”

They all agreed thereto. But few elapsed
Of days and nights before Tukhar’s host raised
The dust and slighted all the Shah’s affairs.
Then Farrukhzad went out to mect Tukhar
With many troops. They met and much talk passed
In public and in private. Farrukhzad,
Moreover, loosed his tongue and told the ills
Wrought by Khusrau Parwiz. He said: “‘ The host
By valour and by counsel will restore
The sovereignty.”

The general replied :—

“*T am not one for words but when I come
To battle with my troops I make things strait
For this world’s warriors. This king when young
Was loved by chief and paladin, and since
The days of such an one as he grow dark
I would that none should look on crown and throne.
The fatal time was when he grew unjust,
And joyed in the injustice of his slaves.”

When Farrukhzad heard this? he chose Tukhar,

1 Cf. p. 193. * Reading with P.

Google

<pb n="415"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 415

And said to him: “ Now go we to the prison,
To those unfortunates, and boldly bear
Shirwi, the brave, the atheling, away.
The captain of the host, whose brain and skin
Thou wilt take sooner, watcheth o’er his prison,
And with six thousand proven cavaliers
Is keeper of those wretched prisoners.”’

Tukhar thus answered: “ We have overlooked
This matter of the captain of the host,
For if the fortune of Khusrau Parwiz
Revive there will not be a paladin
Left in fran, and what with gibbet, bonds,
And dungeon, none will ’scape calamity.”

He spake and urged his charger, speeding like
Azargashasp, and led his powers to battle.
The captain of the host encountered him
Forthwith. Those famous troops were overthrown,
The captain of the host himself was slain
In fight, the forces of the king were scattered,
The day was one of gloom and all was lost.
By that expedient and in war-array
Tukhar made entry of that narrow prison,
And called exalt Shirwi. The prince replied
Forthwith, well knowing why that chief had come.
His heart throbbed, laughing after care, when he
Beheld that cheerful face, but still he wept,
And asked: ‘‘ Where is Khusrau Parwiz?  Is’t

thine
To free me ?”
Said Tukhar: “ As thou’rt a man

Be not perverse, for if thou wilt consent not,
And lettest go this opportunity,
One in sixteen may fail us, but thou hast
Still fifteen brothers left and each deserving
To be the king of kings: the throne of greatness
Would joy in them.”

Google
<pb n="416"/>
C.

2022

416 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

Shirwi remained in tears

And consternation. Should he quit the prison ?

Now Farrukhzad meanwhile was at the gates,
And suffered none to pass to tell the Shah,
But acted as sole chamberlain. When Sol
Grew wan of face, and all the lords had gone
To seek repose, he bade the watch or them
That were its officers to fare to court—
That place of happiness and royal ease—
And said: ‘‘ Your cry to-night must not be that
Of yesternight : all watchmen every watch
Must in their cries employ the name * Kubad.’ *’

They made reply: “* We will; we will forget
Khusrau Parwiz.”

So when the night resumed

Its pitch-like robe from city and bazar
Arose the cry: “ For ever live Kubad,
The scion of the great, and may his name
Be promulgate in all the provinces.”

The night was dark; the monarch of the world
Slept but Shirin beside him was perturbed,
On hearing what the watchman said, and grieved.
Her heart beat fast with care. Roused by her

voice

The Shéh took dudgcon, but she cried: ‘ O sire!
What shall we do? How shall we act herein ? ”

He said: ‘‘O moon-face! why dost chatter so
When I am sleeping ? ”’

She replied: ‘ Give ear,
And listen to the watch.”’
He heard; his cheeks
Became like flowers of fenugreek ; he said : —
“What time three watches of the night have
passed

Consult the astrologers for when this knave
Was born I named him privily Kubad,

Google

<pb n="417"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 417

But I have spoken of him as Shirwi,
And kept his other name concealed. In public
Shirwi hath always been his name, so why
Is this vile fellow calling him Kubad ?
We must depart while it is night toward Chin,
Machin or else Makran, and I will ask
Faghfur for troops, and make our way to them
By some device.”’
But as his star was dark
In heaven so on earth his words were wild :
His scheme of night-departure came to naught.
He took a hard case easily and told
Shirin: ‘ The time hath come; our foes prevent
Our schemes.”’
She answered him: “ For ever live:

Far from thee ever be the evil eye.
Plan in thy wisdom something for thyself :
Ne’er may the foeman have of thee his will.
As soon as it is light that ruseful one
Will turn toward the palace past all doubt.”

He called for armour from the treasury—
Two Indian scimitars and Ruman casque,
A quiver, arrows, and a golden shield—
And for a valiant slave who loved the fight.
He went forth to the garden in the dark,
What time the crow awakeneth, hung up
His golden buckler on a bough where none
Was like to pass and with a heavy sword
Beneath his knee sat on the flowery sward.

VOL. VIII. 2D

Google oe

C.

2023
<pb n="418"/>
. 2024

418 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

§ 65

How Khusrau Parwiz was taken and how Shirwi sent
him to Taisafin

When Sol shot down its rays the enemy—

That doer of div’s work—approached the palace,

And went about it, but that splendid seat

Was void of Shah. They gave to spoil his treasures,

None recking of his travail, and then all

Withdrew in tears and wroth at fortune’s doings.

What of yon swiftly turning sky say we,
Which never resteth from its instancy ?
It giveth unto one the royal crown,

Another to the fishes in the sea.

One man hath head and feet and shoulders bare,
No peace, no food, no shelter anywhere ;

It giveth to another drink of milk
And honey ; furs, brocade, and silks to wear !

Dust and the darkness of the grave await
Them both. To be unborn would best abate
The sage’s cares for never to have been

Is better than to be for small and great.

Now for fresh toil upon Khusrau Parwiz
To give reciters novel histories.

The Shah bode in that mead, a lofty tree
O’ershadowing him. When half the longsome day
Had passed he hungered. Now within the pleasance
There was a man employed who did not know
The king by sight. The Sun-faced bade his slave :-—
** Cut off a cantle from this costly belt.”

That cantle had on it five studs of gold
Enriched with jewelry. The king then spake
Thus to the gardener: ‘‘ These studs will prove
Of use to-day. Go thou to the bazar,

Google

<pb n="419"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 419

Buy meat and bread, and shun frequented paths.”
Those jewels would have cost a purchaser
Some thirty thousand drachms. Immediately
The gardener sought a baker and asked bread
In change for that gold cantle but the baker
Said: “I have not its worth and cannot pass it.”
The two conveyed it to a jeweller,
And said: “ Price this according to thy knowledge.”
The expert, when he looked upon the studs,
Said: ‘‘ Who will dare to buy, for this should be
Within the treasury of Khusrau Parwiz,
Who hath a hundred new like this each year ?
Whom didst thou steal these jewels from, or didst
Thou cut them off a slave who was asleep ? ”
The three men went to Farrukhzad and took
The jewels, gold and all, and he on seeing
Ran to the new-made king and showed the gems,
And cantle severed from the golden girdle.
Shirwi said to the gardener: “‘ If thou
Show’st not to me the owner of these jewels
I will behead thee and thy kith and kin
Forthwith.”’
““O Shah!” he answered, “in the garden
There is a man in armour, bow in hand,
In height a cypress and with cheeks like Spring,
In all points like a king; he brighteneth
The garden everywhere, and in his mail
Is like the shining sun. His golden shield
Is hanging from a bough. Before him standeth
A slave with loins girt up who cut for him
This jewelled cantle, handed it to me,
And told me: ‘ Hence away and from the market
Buy bread and relish.’ Swift as wind I left him
But now.”
Shirwi knew: ‘° ’Tis Khusrau Parwiz,
His features are the age’s cynosure,’’

Google
<pb n="420"/>
C. 2025

420 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUS!I

And sent three hundred horsemen from the court,
Like rushing wind, down to the river-bank.
Khusrau Parwiz, perceiving them afar,
Grew pale and drew his scimitar, but when
They saw the king of kings they all returned
In tears. They went to Farrukhzad and said :—
‘‘ We are but slaves; he is Khusrau Parwiz—
A Shah to whom the evil day is new.
None either in the garden or the fray
Would dare breathe cold on him.”’

Then Farrukhzad
Went to the Shah with troops from court, advanced
Alone and spake at large. Khusrau Parwiz
Gave ear to him. He said: “ If now the Shah
Will grant me audience, and will excuse
My conduct, I will come and tell the truth
To him but otherwise will hie me. home.”

Khusrau Parwiz made answer: “ Say thy say,
For thou art neither friend nor enemy.”

Then said that fluent speaker: ‘‘ View the matter
More wisely and assume that thou hast slain
A thousand warriors, yet thou wilt get
Thy fill of fight at last while all fran
Is hostile to thee, leagued both heart and body
In opposition. Wait the will of heaven :

Perchance these conflicts may result in love.”

‘** Yea,”’ said Khusrau Parwiz, “‘ ’tis well. What I
Dread are the vile who may approach and treat me
With all indignities if so they will.”

While he was speaking thus to Farrukhzad
His heart was troubled at his agéd fortune
Because astrologers had said to him,

And he had been astonied at their words :—

* Thy death will come to thee between two heights,
And by a slave’s hand in a lonely spot.

One height will be of gold and one of silver,

Google

<pb n="421"/>
KHUSRAU PARWIZ 421

And thou with broken heart wilt sit between.
Thy heaven will be golden, thine earth iron,
And fortune will be full of enmity.”

He said: ‘‘ So now this armour is mine earth,
My golden shield my heaven, and the heights
Are my two treasuries within the garden,

Which used to make my heart shine like a lamp.
In sooth my days are coming to an end:

Where is my star that used to light the world ?
Where are the satisfaction and the peace

Of me who had my name inscribed on crowns ? ”’

They brought an elephant for him. His soul
Was dark with woe. He mounted, and the troops
Led him away while in the ancient tongue
He cried: “‘O treasure! if thou art my foe
Be not a friend to these mine enentfies,

For I am in the hands of Ahriman

To-day. Thou aid’st me not in my distress :

Conceal thyself and show thyself to none.”
Kubad gave orders to his minister :—

** Remind him not of any evil deed,

But bid them carry him to Taisafun

Away from court with his own counsellor.

There let him bide in peace for many a day

And harmed by none. Let trusty Galints

Be made his keeper with a thousand horsemen.”’

When thus the sky revolved above his head

His reign had lasted eight and thirty years.

It was the day of Dai of month Azar,

A time for fires and wine and roasted fowls,

When from Khusrau Parwiz the Grace of kingship

Withdrew and he was crownless like a slave.
Kubiad acceded and put on the crown,

And sat in peace rejoicing on the throne.

The franian troops did homage to the Shah,

Who gave one year’s pay from the treasury,

Google

C. 2026
<pb n="422"/>
422 THE SHAHNAMA OF FIRDAUSI

And lived but seven months so call him naught,
Or call him Shah, just as it pleaseth thee.
Such is this tyrant Hostel’s wont! Thou must
Look not upon it with an eye of trust.
Of all things cultivate a generous mood,
And let thy thoughts be ever bent on good.
When thou shalt say: “ The world hath granted me
My wish ”’ then mark! that wish will prove to thee
A bond and snare. If so thou canst abstain
From thought of ill and list this sage’s strain.
Here will thy soul from every fault be freed
When thou dost rightly both in word and deed.

Google
<pb n="423"/>
INDEX

This Index and the Table of Contents at the beginning of the
volume are complementary. References to the latler are in
Roman numerals.

A

ABBREVIATIONS, list of, xv
Abbas, Arab chief, attacks Hur-
muzd, 93
Abt Mansur, prose Shahnama
compiled for, 71, 73
Abu’l Kasim, Firdausi, 28
"Ad, Arab tribe, 276
Afrasiyab, ruler of Turan, 242,
300, 349
hoard of, 148, 406
Ahbriman, the Evil Principle, 19,
21, 22, 86, 87, 176, 177,
198, 210, 219, 243, 293,
333, 364, 421
=idolater, 54
= Bahram Chiubina, 89 (?),
295
=Kharrdd, son of Barzin,
III
Ahwaz, city in Khuzistan (Susi-
ana), 400, 402
’Akr Babil, prison, 194, 196
Alans (Alani), people, 369
king of=Khusrau Parwiz,
208, 209, 213
Aleppo (Chalybon-Beroea), city,
41
Amasis, 193
Ambar (Piruz Shapur), city on
the Euphrates, 188
‘Ammiuriya (Ancyra, Angora),
stronghold, 46
*’Amr, Arab chief, attacks Hur-
muzd, 93 .
Amul, city in M4zandardn, 355,
356, 358, 392

423

Google

Amwi, city on Oxus, 354
Andaman, [rdnian noble, 202
Andiv, country, 313

Andiy4n, frdnian warrior, viii,

225, 257, 259, 269, 293,
294, 296

deceived by Czesar’s talis-
man, 273

Bahram Chubina writes to,
285

receives Kirman, 313
Antioch, city, 41
Apothegms, 119, 166, 206, 215,
221, 235, 295
Arab, Arabs, 67, 94, 188, 190,
I9I, 208, 230, 241, 250,
251
invasion of, 72, 93
withdraw, 96
steed, 126, 302
sages, 406
Arabia, 24 nole
Arabic, language, 73
Tabari. See Tabarf.
Arash, son of Kai KubA4d, 216
Araxes, river, Battle of , 76
Arba, river, 194, 195
Architect, Ruman, for
Archscribe, vii. See [zid Gashasp
and Mihran
Ardabil, city in Azarbdijan, 93,
99, 100, 184, 226
Ardaw4n, Ashk4nian king, 214,
285
Ardshfr PApak4n, first Sdsdnian
Shah, 191, 214, 222, 265,
270, 285, 392, 393
true Cross in treasury of,
380
<pb n="424"/>
424

Aries, constellation, 342, 394
nish, famous franian archer,
75, 219 and note
Arjasp, king of Turan, 95, 104,
148
hoard of, 148
Armenia, country,
193, 202, 377
Armenian, Armenians, 188, 189,
195, 220, 248 285
= like, 254
= Mausil, 293 and note
Atrow-shots, three famous, 75
Bahram Chubina’s, 126
Arsacids, rivalry of, with Dasin-
ians, 73
Artang, the house of the here-
Siarch Mani, 172 and note
302 and note
‘Arts, treasure, 406 and nofe
Arwand (Tigris), river, go
Arzhang. See Artang.
Asfandiydr, franian hero, 95,
TO4 and note, 171,
332, 395 note
Ashkabis, Turanian hero, fight
of, with Rustam referred
to, 75
Ashkanian, Ashkdnians, 214
Asia, 187
Minor, 193, 194
Assurbanipal, Assyrian king, and
Khusrau Parwiz, reigns
of, compared, 193
Astrologers. consulted on birth
of Shirwf, 372
Avars, Caucasian tribe, 194
Awaza, Stronghold, yi, 134, 138
Axumite, Ethiopian dynasty, 24
nole
Ayin Gashasp (Yazdanbakhsh),
ranian noble, Vii, 75,
T5909 noale, 222
Hurmuzd consults, 174, 177
and the Prisoner, Story of,
177 seq,
Marches to Hamadan, 178
consults a scer, 178
Murdered, 18
avenged by Bahram Ch.
bina, 1&8

93, 96, 18.4,

Go gle

Azargashas P, Trdnian

Bad

INDEX
Ayin Gashasp,

troops of, dis.
perse, 18,

Azar, month, 244, 421

(Azargashasp
282

zar_ Abddagan
g.v.), ix,

Azargashasp, spirit of the light-

ning, 46, 22, 152, 176,
245, oars

temple of (Azar Abidagan),
at Shiz (Takht-i-Suaj-
man) in Azarbdijan, 08,
184, 210 and note
Visited by Khusrau_ Par-
wiz, 283, 397, 312

Warrior,

296

Azar Makan, father of Farrukh-

zaid, 408

B

Babil (Babylon), 194, 249
Bacchus, Saint and Martyr, 188

actrian camels, 47
Awar, treasure, 406 and
nole

Baghdad, 109 note, 112, 174, 193,

203, 393

Bahman, Shah, 270
3ahman, franian noble, 22
Bahram, son of Siy4wush, Vili,

75, 163, 245
reported slain, 128
returns with Captive sor.
cerer, 128
Speech of, 166
related to Bahram Chibina,

187
wife of, 189

warns Bahrim Chubina,
247

Pursues Khusray Parwiz.
233

besieges Khusrau Parwiz,
236

beguiled by Bandwi, 236,
245

returns with Bandwi to

Lahram Chibina, 238
<pb n="425"/>
INDEX

Bahram, blamed by Bahram
Chubina, 238
given custody of Bandwi,
238
slain by Bahram Chubina,
247
Bahram, frdnian general, left in
charge of host by Khusrau

Parwiz, 296

Bahram, father, in Persian
Tabari, of Bahram Chit-
bina, 77

Bahram, day, 279
fatal to Bahram Chubina,
337 and nole, 339 and
nole
Bahram, name of, inscribed on
cup incites Khusrau Par-
wiz to afflict Rai, 365 and

note

Bahram Azarmihdn,  frdnian
scribe, vi
Hurmuzd attempts to

suborn, 85 seq.

reveals state-secret to Hur-
muzd, 88

put to death, 89

Bahram Chubina, frdnian hero,

Vi seq., 70, 73, 184, 187,
199, 209, 214, 215, 343 Seq.,
352 Seqg., 356 seq., 360, 383

Romance of, 72 seqg., 187,
I9I, 304 nole
Néldeke on, 73

account of, 72

seller of sheep’s heads and,
74, 107

dream of, 75

withholding of booty by, 76,
148

insult of Hurmuzd to, 76

defeat of, in Lazic war, 76

sends swords to Hurmuzd,
76

parentage of, 76, 77

malicious speech about, 77,
150

coinage of, 77, 173

brought to notice of Hur-
muzd, 98

described, 98, 206

Google

425

Bahram Chubina, identified by

Zad Farrukh, 99

sent for by Hurmuzd, 100

consulted by Hurmuzd, roo

made commander-in-chief,
102

selects his troops, 102

justifies his method in so
doing, 104

receives Rustam’s banner
from Hurmuzd, 105

receives Mihran as recorder
from Hurmuzd, 106

marches from Taisafun, 106

refuses to be recalled, 108

marches to Khuzistan, 109
and note

hay-seller and, 109

marches toward Damaghan,
109

parley of, with Faghfur, 112

refuses Sawa’s offers, 113
seq., 117 seq.

counselled by Kharrad, 121

arrays his host, 122

prayer of, before battle, 123

encourages the [rdnians
against Siwa's_ sorcery,
elc., 124 seq.

defeats and slays Sawa, 126

doings of, after battle with
Sawa, 130

rewarded by Hurmuzd, 133

ordered to attack Parmiuda,
133

holds revel in a garden,
135

attacked by and defeats
Parmida, 135 seq.

besieges Parmida in Awaza,
138

informs Hurmuzd, 138

negotiates for surrender of
Awadza with Parmida,
138 seq.

receives surrender of, and
insults, Parmuda, 143

blamed by Kharrdd and
archscnbe, 144

tries to appease Parmuda,

145
<pb n="426"/>
426

INDEX

Bahram Chubina, has inventory

made of the wealth in
Awaza, 147

sends fzid Gashasp_ with
spoil to fran, 148

Hurmuzd begins to suspect,
151

advances of, to Khan re-
jected, 153

goes to Balkh, 153

guided by an onager, 156

incited to seek the kingship,
158

change in, 158

questioned by Kharrdd, 158

sends Yalin-sina after Khar-
rid and archscribe, 159

pardons archscribe, 160

Luck of, 162

renounces allegiance to Hur-
muzd, 162

intercepts the royal letters,
163

consults the chiefs, 163

becomes friends with the
Khan, 172

appoints a prince for Khur-
asan, etr., 173

marches to Rai, 173

avenges murder of Ayin
Gashasp, 181

historical campaign of,
against Khusrau Parwiz,
189

carline and, 189, 303

marches to the Nahrawan,
201

spies’ report of, to Khusrau
Parwiz, 201

Khusrau Parwiz marches to
meet, 203
interview of, with, 204

seq.

tampers with troops of
Khusrau Parwiz, 225

combat of, with Khusrau
Parwiz, 228

arrives at Taisafin, 231

sends Bahram, son of Siya-
wush, in pursuit of Khus-
rau Parwiz, 233

Google

Bahram Chubina, blames Bah-

ram, 238

chides, warns and imprisons
Bandwi, 238

addresses the magnates, 239

elected Shah, 243

gives malcontents three
davs to quit [ran, 244

plot against, 245 seq.

warned, 247

slays Bahram, son of Siya-

wush, 247
hears of Bandwi's escape,
248

deceived by forged letters,
287, 293, 294

marches against Khusrau
Parwiz, 287

goes to Azar Abddagiin, 288

arrays his host, 239

fights with and slays Kut,
290

sends back corpse of Kut,
291

worsts Rimans, 292

** Harvest of,’’ 292

charges and routs Khusrau
Parwiz’ centre, 294

fights with Gurdwi, 294

goes to fight Khusrau Par-
wiz and his body-guard,
297

leaves Janfuruz in charge of
host, 297

puts to flight and pursues
Khusrau Parwiz, 298

Surtsh saves Khusrau Par-

wiz from, 299

deserted by his chiefs, 302

retreats, 302

releases Nastuh, 306

goes to Rai, 306

welcomed by Khan, 316

asks oath of Khan, 317

counsels Khan to _ resist
MakAatura, 318

challenged by Makatira,
319

fight of, with Makatura,
320

Khan sends gifts to, 321

~~
<pb n="427"/>
INDEX

Bahram Chubina, asked by
Khan's wife to avenge
death of her daughter
on lion-ape, 324

battle of, with hon-ape, 325

extradition of, demanded
by Khusrau Parwiz, 328

urges Khan to make war on
fran, 330

sets forth for fran, 331

Kharrad attempts to pre-
judice, with Khan, 333

arrives at Marv, 336

fatal day of, 337, 339

Kulin seeks interview with,
339

Kulhin stabs, 340

sister of, laments over, 340

dving speech of, 341

makes Yalin-sina his man-
datory, 342

letter of, to Khan, 343

burial of, 343

name of, on cup, 365 and
note

Bahram Gur, Shah, 75, 129 and
note

Bahram-Gushnasp, father in
Arabic Tabar{ of Bahram
Chubina, 77

Bahram Tal, 138 and note

Balkh, city, 22, 74, 95, 153, 159,
161, 173

aphorist of, 221
Balwi, franian nonle, viii, 257, seq.
deceived by Cesar’s talis-
man, 273
praised by Cesar, 279
receives Chach, 314

Bandwi maternal uncle of Khus-
rau Parwiz, vii seg., 200,
202, 204 Seq., 224, 225, 227,
231, 234, 245 seqg., 289,
296, 298, 356, 357

imprisonment of, 77, 176

Gustaham and, escape and
revolt, 182

referred to, 189

put to death, 191, 355

accompanies Khusrau Par-
wiz in his flight, 231

Google

427

Bandwi, turns back and murders
Hurmuzd, 232
rejoins Khusrau Parwiz, 233
promises to save Khusrau
Parwiz, 234
disguises himself as Khusrau
Parwiz, 235
beguiles Bahram, son ot
Siyawush, 236, 245
imprisoned by Bahram Chu-
bina, 238
Bahram Chubina hears of
escape of, 248
entertained by Mausil, 249
goes with Mausil to meet
KKhusran Parwiz, 282
Bahram Chubina writes to,
285
causes defection of Bahram
Chubina’s chiefs, 302
insults of, to Niydtus, 309,
310
reconciled to Niyatus, 311
minister of Khusrau Par-
wiz, 313
adherents of, beheaded, 370
Bani Tayy, Arab tribe, 188
Bar, treasure, 406 and note
Barbad, minstrel, xi, 397 seg., 406
supersedes Sarkash, 399
Barbar, town and country (Brit-
ish Somaliland), 381
Barda’, city on the borders of
Azarbdijin and Armenia,
99, 100, 1384, 222, 226
Barzin, general of Nushfrwan, 17
Barzin, vil seq., father of Khar-
rad, 74, 76, 190, 205 and
passim
Barzin, father of Jahn, 391
Barzin, sacred Fire, 216
Batarun (Marcian), Ruman gen-
eral, 41, 47, 52
Berlin, 192
Bih Ardshir (Seleucia q.v.), 194,
196
Bistam (Gustaham q.v.), 255 and
note, 250
Bistun, rock famous for its in-
scriptions near Kirman-
shah, 20g
<pb n="428"/>
428

Bizhan and Manizha, Story of,
referred to, 72.
Brazen Hold, 171
Bulghar (Bulgaria), 406
Burns, quoted, 3
Burzmihr, scribe, 81, 87, 313
= Buzurjymihr (¢) q¢.v., 7%
Buzurjmihr, scribe and coun-
sellor of Nushirnwan, v,
3 seq., 07 Seq.
goes hunting with, and 1s
suspected of theft by,
Nushirnwan, 4
disgraced by Nushirwan, 5
instructs Nushirwan’s page,
refuses to admit himself in
the wrong, 6 seq.
treated with increasing
rigour, 7, 8
released, 9
divination by, 10 seq.
advises with Nushirwan, 47
seq.
instructed by Nushirwan to
prove Hurmuzd, 56 seg.
abolition of Fire-worship
foretold by, 68
death of, 69, 71
= Burzmihr (?), 71
Mas’udi on, 71

C

CESAR, V, Vili seq., 8 seq., 19, 43
Seq., 51 Seq., 230, 232, 245,

252 Seq., 257 Seqg., 299,
300 Sey., 334, 373 Seq.
408 seq.

death of, 43

son and successor of, offends
Nushirwan, 44 seq.

marches against Nushfrwan,
40

_ attacks Hurmuzd, 93

retakes cities, 93

makes peace with Hurmuzd,
95

welcomes Khusrau Parwiz,
257

Google

INDEX

Cesar, offers help to Khusrau
Parwiz, 261
changes his mind, 262
consults the astrologers, 264
decides to help Khusrau
Parwiz, 265
offers daughter to Khusrau
Parwiz, 266
offer of, accepted by Khus-
rau Parwiz, 269, 270
talisman of, 271
deceives Ruman envoys,
272
mastered by MKharrad,
274
gifts of, to Kharrad, 278
writes to Khusrau Parwiz,
279
praises Ruman envoys, 279
counsels Maryam, 27y, 2580
gives Niyatus charge of
Maryam, 28o
corpse of Kut sent to, 201
Khusrau Parwiz announces
death of Bahram Chubina
to, 345
daughter of, gives birth to
Shirwi, 371
Khusrau Parwiz’ letter to,

373

rejoicing of, at birth of
Shirwi, 374

embassy of, to Khusrau
Parwiz, 374

gifts of, given by Khusrau
Parwiz to Shirwi, 381

invited to seize fran, 408

tricked by Khusrau Parwiz
and retreats, 410

Callinicus (Warigh q.v.), city,
188

Carline and Bahram Chubina,
189, 303

Catholicus, 195
Caucasus, 72
Chach (Tashkand), city in Turan,

314, 377

bows of, 125, 126, 204

Chalah, 193
Chalcedon, 194, 195
Chalybon-Beroca, 41

<pb n="429"/>
INDEX

Chao-wou =Sawa q.v., 72
Chase, the, Khusrau’ Parwiz’
equipage for, 384
Chess, 371
Chin, country (often=Turdn),
IX, 45, 95, 97, 130, 139,
172, 216, 217, 316 and
passim
brocade of, 65, 159, 381, 384
prince of, =Parmuda, 142
prince of =Sawa, 222
robe of, 205
sage of, 235
tunics of, 257
silk from, 258, 269, 374
sea of, 377
Chinese, 72
Chinwi, 331
Christ, x1, 43,
380
account of, 276
fathcr of, 276
mother of, 276
Faith of, 310
Cross of, xi, 377, 380
laughter of, 191, 380
Christian, Christians, 21, 67, 195,
196, 256, 272, 308, 310,
381
shut gates of Karsan against
Khusrau Parwiz, 252
Chubin (Jubin), father, according
to Mas’idi, of Bahram
Chubina, 77
Chubina, 215, 222,
meaning of, 98 note
Circesium, 1838
Climes, the Seven, 395
Clough, quoted, 187
Constantinople, 194
Contents, Table of, v
Cook, Chief, of Nushirwan,
grievance of, 18
Cross, Crosses, 308, 309, 374
the true, xi, 191, 196, 253,
377, 378, 380
Crows and Owls, story of, 263
and note
Ctesiphon (Taisaftin, g.v.), 42,
188, 189, 143, 194, 196

IQI, 272, 310,

Google

429

D

DADAFRID, melody, 398 and note
Dai, month and day, 55 note, 173,
421
Dakikf, Persian poet, 190
Damaghan, city, 109, 189
Damawand, mountain south of
Caspian, 391
Dara, Shah, 220, 242, 387
Dara (Daras), city, 41, 194
taken by Nushirwan, 41
ceded by Khusrau Parwiz,
188
Dara Panah, 189, 284
goes disguised to Khusrau
Parwiz’ camp, 256
betrays Bahram Chubina,
286
returns to Bahram Chubina
with forged letter, 237
Darab, Shah, 191
Darabgird, city, 313
Darband, 309 note
Darius Hystaspis, 187
DaArman, 202
Dastagird, citv, 193, 196
taken by Heraclius, 194
Dead Sea, 192
Dhu Kar, battle of, 188
historical account of, 190
date of, Ig1
Diba-1- Khusraut,
and ole
Dimna, Kalila and, Book of, 202
mole, 399
Div, 159, 161, 206, 209, 211, 217,
218, 290, 341, 342, 399
and note, 4158
= Ahriman, 27, 50, 87, 123.
215, 222, 304, 341, 340, 4il
=Bahram Chubina, 153,
219, 293, 2905
—witch, 101
Black, 171
=Zahhik, 242
= Kulun, 342
Duk, plain, 282, 284
mountain, 289

treasure, 406
<pb n="430"/>
430

E

EGyPptT, 187, 193

Epyptian, 193
thorn, 210

Ether, 275

INDEX

Ethics, Muhammadan, respected,

74
Euphrates, river, 188, Igo
Eve, evil, 16, 417

F

FAaGHFUR, of Chin, 74, 97
Faghfur, son of Sawa, 74, 75,

120

confused with Faghfur of

Chin, 74
parley of, with
Chubina, 112
head of, on spear, 132

Bahram

Failakus (Philip I] of Macedon),

387
Falatun (Plato), 264
Farat (Fuphrates), 93, 250
Farghan, Ruman architect,
Khusrau Parwiz, 401
Farhad, lover of Shirin, 192
Faridin, Shah, 129, 205,
231, 242, 260, 300,
Séq., 301, 392

Farrukh, ruler of Nimruz, 37

and
seq.

218,
376

5

Farrukhanziad (Farrukhzid q.v.),

195

Farrukhzad (Farrukhanzad

q.v.), favourite of Khusrau

Parwiz,

conspires with Guraz,
$12

goes to the host, 412

408,

rebels in favour of Shirwf,

413
brother of, 413 and nole
conspires with Tukhar,
proclaims Shirwi Shah,
hears where K<husrau
wiz is hiding, 419
holds talk with
Parwiz, 420

Google

404
416
Par-

IKhusrau

Farrukhzad, franian warnor,
241, 296
specch of, 240
Farwardin, month, 367, 371
Firdausi, 1x, 71, 73, 74.
1yg0, 192, 193
admits Muhammadan = tra-
ditions into Shahnama,

137,

death of son of, 1g0
and rhyme-word, 307) wf
Fire-worship, abolition of, pro-
phesied, 68
Fish, mythological, 212 and nvte
Founts, the Seven, 3y2

G

Gaiumart, Shah, 24, 55, 260,

269, 310, 376
Faith of, 277

Galinus, put in charge of Khus-
rau Parwiz, 421

Garden of the Indians, 196

Garshasp, franian noble, 18

Gashan, as rhyme-word, 307 note

Gashasp, [ranian noble, 17, 18

Gashasp, father, in Shahnama, ot
Bahram Chubina, 76, 99,
162, 169, 304

Gemini, constellation, 86, 203

George, Armenian general, 195

Giv, [rAnian hero, 168

Grace or Glory, the divine, 12,
18, 21 and passim

Green Sea, 46 and note

Gidarz, franian hero, 104, 168

Gurd4z (Shahrbaraz q.v.), general
of Khusrau Parwiz, xi,
194, 408, 409 seg.

conspires with Farrukhzad,

408
invites Casar to take [ran,
408
rebels, 411
Gurdwi, brother of Bahram
Chibina, x, 74, 202,
205, 206, 231, 293, 294,
296, 298, 342, 349, 354,
358

<pb n="431"/>
INDEX ; 431

Gurdwi, a legitimist, 74

Gustaham and, persuade
Khusrau Parwiz not to
make a night-attack, 224

takes charge of baggage, 228

Bahram Chubina writes to,
285

fights with Bahram Chubina,

2

receives province, 313

informs Khusrau Parwiz of
Gurdya’s doings, 356

writes to, and sends Khus-
rau Parwiz’ letter to,
Gurdya, 360

wife of, goes with letters’ to
Gurdya, 360

hears of the plight of Rai
and informs Gurdya, 367

Gurdya, sister of Bahram Chut-

bina, vii, viii,x, 74,104 note,
187, 191, 347, 358, 365

a legitimist, 74

present at council, 164

speech of, 165, 167, 171

referred to, 221

counsels Bahram Chiubina,
221

laments Bahram Chubina,
340

resident at Marv, 346 seq.

informs her followers of the
Khan's offer of marriage,

349

starts for Iran, 351

parleys with Tuwurg, 352

arrives at Amwi, 354

doings of reported to Khus-
rau Parwiz, 356, 358

met by Gustaham, 356

asked in marriage by Gusta-
ham, 357

receives letters from Khus-
rau Parwiz and Gurdwi,
360

plots murder of Gustaham,
360

justifies murder of Gusta-
ham, 361

reports death of Gustaham
to Khusrau Parwiz, 361

Google

Gurdya, dresses up as a
warrior to please Khusrau
Parwiz, 363

prowess of, in drinking, 364
appointed overseer of royal

bower, 364
diverts Khusrau Parwiz and
saves Rai, 368 .

Gurgan, city and region in
eastern Mazandaran, 15,

39?
Gurgin, Iranian hero, 72, 211,
216
Gurkils, tribe (?), 15
Gushtasp, Shah, 41, 68, 95, 148,
213, 279, 392, 393
Gustaham (Bistam q.v.), mater-
nal uncle of Khusrau
Parwiz, vii, vili, x, 199,
200, 202, 204 Sey.,227, 228,
231, 255, 257, 259, 269,
282, 289, 293, 295, 298
imprisonment of, 77, 176
Bandwi and, escape and
revolt, 182
informs Khusrau Parwiz of
the blinding of Hurmuzd,
184
referred to, 189
revolt of, 191, 355
saves Khusrau Parwiz from
Turk, 220
Gurdwi and, dissuade Khus-
rau Parwiz from making
a night-attack, 224
treasurer, 229 and note
accompanies Khusrau Par-
wiz in his flight, 231
turns back and murders
Hurmuzd, 232
rejoins Khusrau Parwiz, 233
Khusrau Parwiz warned
against, 255, 256
deceived by Cesar’s talis-
man, 272
praised by Cesar, 279
Bahram Chubina writes to,
285
chooses comrades for Khus-
rau Parwiz in battle, 296
receives Khurasan, 313
<pb n="432"/>
432
Gustaham, summoned to court,
535
hears of execution of Band-
wi, 355
hears of Gurdya's doings,
356

goes to meet Gurdya, 356
e asks Gurdya in marriage,
357
Gurdya plots murder of, 360
intimates of, beheaded, 370

H

HaitAx, Haitdlians (White Huns),
45, 242, 329, 379, 377
Halab (Chalybon-Beroea, Alep-
po), city in northern
Syria, 41, 46, 47
Hamadin (Ekbatana), city in
*Irak-i-’Ajami, 178, 189
Hamavarin (Yaman), south-
western Arabia, 104, 168
Hamdan Gashasp, Iranian chief,
122, 163, 204 speech of,
166
HAni bin Mas’id, Arab chief, 190
Harat, city in north-western
Afghanistan, 71, 92, I10,
116, 117, 130, 173
marchlord of. See Makh.
desert of, 114
Haris, father of Kais, 250
‘* Harvest of Bahram,” 292
Hay, sack of, Bahram Chubina
and the, 10g
Hazara, father of Kut, 291
Heraclius, Eastern Roman Em-
peror, 187, 19!
attempts of, for peace with
Khusrau Parwiz, 194, 195
takes Dastagird, 194
retreat of, 195, 196
Hermit, Khusrau Parwiz and
the, vili, 254
Herodotus, 193
Hierapolis, 188
Hijaz, 24 and note, 66, 67
Hind, Hindustan, 24, 275, 317,
376, 379, 381, 400, 405
king of, 52

Google

INDEX

Hira, city, 188, ror
end of dynasty of, 190

Hira, Mount, 42

Hisham Ibn Al-Kalbti, 73

Hurmuzd, Shah, v. sey., 50 seqg..6y
Seg., 74 Sey., 75, S7, 147,
Iog, 170, 174, 1 7
212, 213, 222, 232
279, 304, 312, 333, 355,
370, 370

examination of, 3, 57

counselled by Nushinvain,
25 seq.

Nushirwan’'s testament in
favour of, and last coun-
sels to, O1 seq.

character of, 70

system of administration of,
71

justice of, 71
instances of, 90 s¢7.

scribes é¢xecuted by, 71

insult of, to Bahram Chii-
bina, 76

Lazic war renewed by, 76

Bahram Chubina’s gift of
swords to, 76

accession of, 78

turns to evil courses, 81

puts to death Izid Gashasp,
83

poisons Zarduhsht, 83 seq.

schemes aguinst and puts to
death Simah Barzin, 85
Seq.

attempts to suborn Bahram
Azarmihan, &5 seq.

gives audience, 56

hears state-secret from Bah-
ram Azarmihan, 88

puts to death Bahrim Azar-
mihan, &9

repentance of, 90, 93

places of residence of, 90

wars of, 92

attacked by Sawa, 92

Sawa’s letter to, 93

attacked by Cesar, 93
Khazars, 93
Arabs, 93

consults the franians, 94

<pb n="433"/>
INDEX

Hurmuzd, counselled by his
wazir, 94
makes peace with Czxsar, 95
attacks and defeats’ the
’ Khazars, 95
sends for Mihran Sitad, 97
hears prophecy about Bah-
ram Chubina, 98
orders search to be made for
Bahram Chubina, 99
discovers and_ sends_ for
Bahram Chubina, 100
consults Bahram Chubina,
100
gives chief command to
Bahram Chiabina, 102
questions Bahram Chabina,
103
gives Rustam’s banner to
Bahram Chubina, 105
sends Mihran with Bahram
Chabina, 106
intelligencer after Bah-
ram Chubina, 107
to recall Bahram Chubina,
108
Kharrad, son of Barzin,
as envoy to Sawa, I10
hears of Bahram Chubjina’s
victory, 132
makes thanksgiving, 132
rewards Bahram Chubina
and the troops, 133
surveys spoils sent by Bah-
ram Chubina, 150
grows suspicious of Bahram
Chubina, 151
dismisses the Khadn with
gifts, 152
hears from Kharrdd of
Bahram Chubina’s  dis-
affection, 160
consults with high priest,
161
Ayin Gashasp, 174, 177
plans to make away with
Khusrau Parwiz, 174
hears of Khusrau Parwiz’
flight, 176
imprisons Bandwi and Gus-
taham, 176
VOL. VIII.

Google

433

Hurmuzd, hears of the murder
of Ayin Gashasp, 182
dethroned and blinded, 183,
200
visited in prison by Khusrau
Parwiz, 185, 198, 230
requests of, to Khusrau
Parwiz, 199
referred to, 211
counsels Khusrau Parwiz,
230
murdered, 232
Hurmuzd Garabzin or Galabzin
(Kharrad son of Barzin
q.v.), 190
Hushang, Shah, 376
Faith of, 380

I

IjAs BIN KaBfsa, 188
governor of Hira, 190
Indian, Indians, ix, 377
bells and gongs, 46, 120
swords, 127, 145, 417
Garden of the, 196
Kharrad’s account of the,
275
fraj, youngest son of Faridun,
266, 376 and nole, 392
fran, ix, 13, 19, 43, 46, 48 and

passim
frAnian, f[rdnians, viii, 19, 99,
IOI, III, II9, 124, 130,

135 and passim
take Sakila, 47
chiefs received in audience
by Hurmuzd, 86
consulted by Hurmuzd, 94
defeat the Khazars, 96
advise Bahram Chiubina,
102, 121, 239 seq., 287
Sawa employs sorcery
against, 123
encouraged by Bahram Chu-
bina, 124
defeat the Turks, 126

revolt against Hurmuzd,
156
elect Bahram Chibina Shah,
243
2E
<pb n="434"/>
434

{sa (Jesus), 276 nole
Ispahan, city in ‘Irak-1-’Aiami,

go

Istakhr (Persepolis), city in
Pars, 90, 313

fzid, 75

Izid Gashasp, archscribe, vi,
74

confusion in name of, 75, 76

put to death by Hurmuzd,
75, 83

malicious speech of, 77 and
note, 150 and nole

imprisoned, 81

sends for high priest, 81

[zid Gashasp, [rdnian warrior,

103, 122, 136, 138, 149,
350, 353, 356

conducts spoil to fran, 149

goes hunting with Bahram
Chubina, 156

speech of, 165

J

JABALA BIN SALIM, 73
Jahn, architect of throne of
Takhdis, 391
Jamasp, minister of Shah Gush-
tasp, 171, 393
prophecy of, 68
additions of, to throne of
Takhdis, 392
Jamshid, Shah, 22, 242, 269, 310,
332, 341, 337
Janfurtz, franian general, 297
Jerusalem, 191, 196
Jesus, Ig!
sayings of, 276 and nole
Cross of, 380
laughter of, 191, 380
Jew, Jews, 21, 67, 276
Jihan (Oxus), river, 94, 99, 134,
174, 332
fords of, 331
Jovian, Eastern Roman Em-
peror, 41
Jupiter, planet, 28, 152, 157, 395
Justin II., Eastern Roman Em-
peror, 41

Google

INDEX

Justinian, Eastern Roman Em-
peror, 4!

-

K

KaBAB, small pieces of meat

skewered together for
roasting, 250
Kabfsa, 188

Kaf, 66 and note
Kai Kaus, Shah, 22, 104, 168,
270, 341
Kai Khusrau, Shah, 148, 219,
279, 332, 392
Kai Kubad, Shah, 89, 170, 260,
270, 310, 332
Kaian, 65, 216
throne, 214
race, 217
Kais, Arab chief, entertains
Khusrau Parwiz, 250
Kaiser Friedrich Museum, 192
Kalila and Dimna, Book of, 202
nole, 390 nole
Kand& Gashasp, [rdnian war-
nor, 103, 122, 163
speech of, 166
Karan, franian hero, 168
Karan, mountain-chief, 189
Karaz, 252 and note
Karistan, 188
Karsan, 188, 252
gates of, shut against Khus-
rau Parwiz, 252
walls of, fall down, 253
Khusrau Parwiz stays at,

253

Kastantaniya (Constantinople),
265

Kaus, Shah. See Kai Kaus.

Kawa, the smith, 72

standard of, 385

Khan of Chin (See too Parmiuda),
vii, 1x, x, 43, 52, 87, 89,
Q7 Seq., 141 Seq., 190, I9T,
204, 215, 220, 263 seq.,
306, 316 seq., 342 Seqg., 340
S€q., 351, 352, 350, 357.
363
<pb n="435"/>
INDEX

Khan of Chin, supposed war of,

with Hurmuzd, 72

marriage of daughter of,
with Nushfrwan referred
to, 72

letter of, 77

dismissed by Hurmuzd with
gifts, 152

refuses advances of Bahram
Chubina, 153

becomes friends with Bah-
ram Chuibina, 172

brother of, 190, I9I
reports flight of Gurdya,

351

ordered to go in pursuit,
351

parley of, with Gurdya,
352

daughter of, 190
killed by lhon-ape, 322,
324
queen of, 190
asks Bahram Chubjfna to
avenge her daughter,
324
disgraced, 344 .
welcomes Bahram Chuibina,
316
swears friendship with Bah-
ram Chubina, 317
dominated by Makatura,

317

advised by Bahram Chubina
to slight Makatura, 318

views fight between Bah-
ram Chubina and Maka-
tura, 320

sends gifts to Bahram Chi-
bina, 321

refuses to give up Bahram
Chubina, 329
distrust Bahram Chubina,

4 -

impress of seal of, obtained
by Kharrad, 338

burns Kulhin’s kindred, 344

seeks in vain for Kharrad,
344

mourns for Bahram Chi-
bina, 344

Google

435

’ Khanagi, Riman noble, 375, 378
leads Czesar's embassy to
Khusrau Parwiz, 374
Khusrau Parwiz’ gifts to,
382
returns to Rim, 382
Khanjast (Urumiah), lake, 282
Kharrad, son of Barzin (Hur-
muzd Garabzin or Galab-
zin), vii seq.,74, 76,158 seq.,
205, 225, 257 Seqg., 269,
270, 331 seq., 381
sent by Hurmuzd as envoy
to Sawa, 110
beguiles Sawa and flees, 111
flight of, reported to Sawa,
112
counsels Bahram Chubina,
I2I
seeks refuge, 123
counts [Iranian slain, 127
blames and counsels Bahram
Chubina for his behaviour
to Parmiuda, 144, 146
questions Bahram Chubina
on his adventure with the
onager, 158
flees from Balkh with arch-
scribe, 159
makes report of Bahram
Chubina to Hurmuzd, 160
real name of, 190
waits on Khusrau Parwiz,252
speech of, to Cxsar, 259, 275
masters Czsar’s talismans.
274, 275
Cesar’s gift to, 278
praised by Cesar, 279
made chief minister, 314
speech of, to Khan, 332
attempts to prejudice Bah-
ram Chubina to the Khan,
333
intrigues against Bahram
Chubina, 334 seq.
cures daughter of queen of
Chin, 336
incites Kulin to kill Bah-
ram Chubina, 337
asks boon of queen of Chin,

338
<pb n="436"/>
436

Kharrdd, retu rns t

O [ran and is

rewarded, 345

reads out Ciesar’s Ietter to

INDEX

Khusrau Parwiz, 376
Kharrad, franian Reneral, 225

defeats Khazars, g6
region and
People north of the Cau-

K hazar, Khazars,

Khazarwan, franian
Speech of, 241

Khazrd, treasure, 406 and nole

Khurisdn, chieftain, 241

Speech of, 240

Khurdsdn, Province, 78,9

313, 355, 36

9

§0vernor of, 75

prince of, 173

Khurdsanij. See Makh.

Khurdad, day, 25,

173

noble,

4, 241,

Khurra-i-Ardshiy (Ardshir Khur-
in Pars, 251,
252, 412 and note

Ta), district

Khurshid, [ranian chief, 2

Khushnawaz, ruler

of the

70, 296

Haita-

lians, 75, 168, 242, 245,

Khusrau, father of Khazarwan,

241, 296 (?)
Khusray Parwiz, S

316, 334, 335,
367 seq., 395
Ole

n
horse of, story

hah, vii seq.,

71, 74. 170, 173, 174, 181,
182, 191 5€q.,216, 304, 306,

of, or

Hurmuzd plots to kil

flees, 175
adherents gath
Swear fealty

342, 358,
mole, 413

I, 174

€r round, 175

to, 176

Boes to Baghdad, 184

Visits Hurmuzd

185, 198, 230

extensive his
quests of, 18
Materials for

torical

7
reign

Shahndéma, 187
flight of, historical,

Ctesiphon,

Go gle

88

in prison,

con-
of, in

from

Khusrau Parwiz, affects Chris-

tianity in exile, 188
helped on terms by Em.
Peror Maurice, 18x
historical] campaign of,
against Bahrjam Chibina,
18g

cuted by, 190
triumphal arch of, 192
Assurbanipal and, reigns of,

Compared, 143
fall of, historical] account of,

193 seq.
attempts of Heraclius to

Make peace with, 194, 195
treatment of defeated gen-

erals by, 194
prediction concerning, 194
accession of, 197
Hurmuzd’s requests to, 19g
spies’ report of Bahram

Chubina to, 207
takes counsel, 202
marches to meet Bahram

Chiibina, 203
interview of, with Bahram

Chiibina, 204 seg.
attacked by Turk and saved

by Gustaham, 220
dissuaded from Making a
_ *hight-attack, 22
troops of, tampered with by

am Chibina, 226
sends away his baggage, 228
combat of, with Bahram

Chibina, 228, 229
retreats to, and holds, the

bridge of Nahrawan, 228
worsts Yalan-sina, 229
flees to Taisafin, 229
counselled by Hurmuzd, 230
Prepares to flee, 2 31
takes refuge in a Shrine,

233
arrives at Babil, 249
entertained by Kais,

Mihran Sitdd, 251
town of Karsdn and, 252

i)
WN
Oo
<pb n="437"/>
INDEX

Khusrau Parwiz, interview of,

with Hermit, 254

warned against Gustaham,
255, 256

welcomed by Cesar, 257

takes up his abode at
Warigh, 257

instructs his embassy to
Cxesar, 257

Cexsar offers daughter to, 266

accepts Casar’s offer, 269,
270

welcomes Niydtus and
Marvam, 280

marches to Duk, 282

Mausil and, 283

returns to Duk, 284

Dara Panah gocs over to,
286

forges letter to Bahram
Chubina, 286

sends corpse of Kut to
Cesar, 291

decides to fight without
Ruman help, 292, 293

arrays his host, 293

resolves to fight in person,
205

bodyguard of, 296

leaves Bahrim in charge of
host, 296

flees from Bahram Chubina,
298

saved by Surush, 299

returns to Nivdtus and
Maryam, 299

suspected of Christian ten-
dencies, 308

gives banquet to Niyatus
and Rumans, 309

restores captured cities to
Rum, 312

makes Kharraid, son of
Barzin, chief minister, 314

proclamation of, 314

demands extradition of Bah-
rim Chuibina, 328

advised to send envoy to
Khan, 329

resolves to put Bandwi to
death, 354

Google

437

Khusrau Parwiz, summons Gus-

taham, 355

hears of Gurdya’s doings,
356, 358

writes to Gurdya, 359

hears of the death of Gusta-
ham, 362

welcomes Gurdya to court,
362

Gurdya dresses up to please,
363

warned by Shirin against
Gurdya, 364

makes Gurdya overseer of
royal bower, 364

oppresses Rai, 365

relieves Ral, 368

organizes the realm, 369 seq.

puts to death adherents of
Bandwi and. Gustaham,
370

consults astrclogers on birth
of Shirwi, 372

grieved at Shirwi’s horo-
scope, 372
consults the high priest,
372

writes to Cxsar, 373

Cxsar's embassy to, 374

gives Casar’s gifts to Shirwi,
381
presents to Khinagi, 382

and Shirin, Story of, 382
seq.

equipage of, for the chase,
384

married to Shirin, 386

justifies his marriage, 388

gives gilded chamber to
Shirin, 389

displeasured with = Shirwi,
390

and throne of Takdis, 391
seq.

palace of, story of, 400 seq.

Farghan and, 401 seq.

imprisons Ruman artificers,
402

releases Riuiman = artificers,
403

treasures of, 406
<pb n="438"/>
438

Khusrau Parwiz, Guraz intrigues
against 408
device of, against Guraz and
Cesar, 409
sends Farrukhzad to the
host, 412
hears Kubad proclaimed
Shah, 416
arms and hides in garden,
417
palace of, plundered, 418
discovered, 419
holds talk with Farrukhzad,
420
recalls former presage, 420
imprisoned, 421
duration of reign of, 421
Khusrau and Shirin, Persian
poem, 192
Khuzistan (Susiana), province at
head of Persian Gulf, 109
and nole, 193
Kings, Persian Book of, 73
Kirman, region in southern
Iran, 313
Kirmanshah, city between Bagh-
dad and Hamadan, 192
Kishwdad, father of Guidarz, 104
Kubad, Shah, father of Nushir-
wan, 25, 46, 72, 168, 169,
245, 205, 285, 312, 369
Kubad (Shirwi q.v.), Shah, son
of Khusrau Parwiz and
Maryam, 190, 196
secret and public names of,
371, 416
proclaimed Shah, 416
imprisons Khusrau Parwiz,
421
accedes to throne, 421
brief reign of, 422
Kufa, city west of the Euphrates
and in the neighbourhood
of Nejef, 190
Turk in league with
Kharrad against Bahram
Chuibina, x, 335
incited by Kharrdd to kill
Bahram Chubina, 337
arrives at Marv by help of
Khan's seal, 339

Kulin,

Google

INDEX

seeks interview with
Bahram Chaibina, 339
stabs Bahram Chubina, 340
maltreated, 340
kindred of, burnt, 344
Kurakhan, governor of Balkh, 22
Kuran, 277 nole
quoted, 42, 192
Kut, Ruman_ warrior,
289, 291
slain by Bahram Chubina,
290
corpse of, sent back to
Rumans, 291

Kulin,

ix, 2S1,

L

Lazica, region on eastern shore
of Black Sea, 194
Lazic war, renewed by Hurmuzd,
76
Bahram Chubina defeated
in, 76
Leo, constellation, 122, 394
Lion-ape, the, ix, 322 seg.
Loadstone, chamber of, 275
suspended cavalier in, 275
Luhrasp, Shah, 95, 148, 213,
270, 392
Luna, planet, 395

M

MAcufn (China), 417
Mada’in , Ctesiphon (Taisafun)
and neighbouring cities,
xi, 4, 46, 192, 193
palace of Khusrau Parwiz
at, story of, 400
Mah Azar, scribe, 81
Mahmud, Sultan, 24
Mahrwi, 248
Makatura, Turkman chief, ix,
317
dominates the Khan, 318
slighted by the Khan, 318
challenges Bahram Chubina,

319
fight of, with Bahrim Chu-
bina, 320

<pb n="439"/>
INDEX

Makh, 71, 78
Makran (Baluchistan), 393, 417
Mamigonian, Armenian family,
188
Man, weight, 148 and note, 314,
399
Manizha, daughter of Afrasiyab,
Bizhan and, Story of,
referred to, 72
Manwi, town, 253
Marchlord, ill-conditioned,
presses Rai, x, 366
destroys gutters and cats,
3606
recalled, 368
Marcian (Batartin g.v.), 41
Mardanshah (Yalan—sina g.v.),
74, 70
Mardanshah (Mardasas q.v.), son
of Shirin, 189, Iyg1, 193
Mardasas (Mardanshah q.v.), 196
Mardwi, Persian official, 21
Mardwi, gardener, 397
Mars, planet, 395
Martyropohs, ceded by Khusrau
Parwiz, 188
Marv, oasis and city in ancient
Khurasan, now in Turktis-
tin, x, 20, 93, 173, 32306,
337, 346 seq., 352, 356
Marvell, quoted, 399 note
Marvrud (Murghab)}, river in
Khurasin flowing into
and forming the Marv
Oasis, 92
Mary, Maryam, mother of Jesus,
276 note, 277 note
Maryam, daughter of Casar, ix
seg., 158, 192, 276 note,
278, 279, 373, 374, 350
murder of, 193, 389

Oop-

referred to 255, 2066, 269,
270, 371, 351, 359

counselled by Cesar, 279,
280

Niyatus put in charge of,
280

as peace-maker, 310
Mashetta (Mashita q.v.)
Mashita, palace at, Iy2
Masius, Mount, 41

Google

439

| Mas’udi, historian, on Buzurj-
: mithr, 71
Maurice, Eastern Roman Em-
peror, 187, 188
helps Khusrau Parwiz on
terms, 158
murder of, 1903
Mausil, Armenian prince,
189, 248, 282, 295
entertains Bandwi, 249
Khusrau Parwiz and, 283
referred to, 293 and nole
Maximian, Roman Emperor, 188
Mazandaran, region between Al-
burz range and Caspian,
48
| Mercurv, planet, 299, 395
Messiah, the, 267
Mihrak, import of word, 72, 73
Mihrak, servant of Nushirwan,
1&, 19
Mihran, Mihrans, 72, 74
clan of, their importance, 72,

188,

73
Mihran, archscribe, 76
sent with Bahram Chubina,
106
counsels Bahram Chubina,
122 and note
seeks refuge, 123
congratulates Bahram Cha-
bina, 129
takes counsel with Kharrdad,
159
flees from  Balkh
retaken, 159
pardoned by Bahram Chiu-
bina, 160
referred to, 163
speech of, 166
Mihran Sitad, IrAnian notable,
96, 100
embassage of, referred to,
72,97
sent for by Hurmuzd, 97
tells of prophecy about
Bahram Chubina, 98, 216
death of, 99
Mihran Sitad, merchant, enter-
tains Khusrau Panviz,
251

and is

<pb n="440"/>
440

Mihr Hurmuzd, Iranian noble,
196
Mildd, 72, 211
import of word, 73
customs of, 216
Mind, 253 and note
Mintchihr, Shah, 219, 223, 392
Mir Khand, historian, 192
Miskal, measure of weight, a
dram and three sevenths,

394
Misr (Egypt), 381
Modes of speech, 30
Monophysite, 195
Moon, divided by Muhammad,

42, 67
Muhammad, Prophet, v, 42,
191
divides the Moon, 42, 67
birth of, 68
Muhammadan, Muhammadans,

73
elements in ShahnAma, 42
ethics respected, 74
Mush, town west of Lake V4n,
188

N

NAHRAWAN, canal on eastern
bank of Tigris, 187, 204,
206, 231
bridge of, 223, 228 seq.
broken down by Khusrau
Parwiz, 229
Name, secret and public, 372 and
nole
Nard, game, 371
Narses, exarch, treatment of by
Empress Sophia, 76
Narses, general, 189
Narwan, forest, 356, 360, 377
Nastuh, son of Mihran Sitad,
1X, 225, 303
advises Hurmuazd, 96
released by Bahram Cht-
bina, 306
Naudar, Shah, 223, 242

INDEX

Nauruz, Persian New-year’s day
when the sun enters Aries,
216
Nestorian, Nestorians, 195
Nicephorium (Warigh q.v.), 188
Nile, 126, 284, 293, 244
Nimruz,* 196, 284
Nineveh, 193
battle near, 194
Nisa, city (Muhammadabdd ?)
in Khurdsan, or town in
Kirman, 19
Nishapur, city in Khurdsdn, 173
Nisibis, besieged by Romans, 41
ceded by Khusrau Parwiz
(?), 188
Niyatus (Theodosius, son of
Maurice), ix, 189, 281, 28g
brother of Czsar, 280, 310
put in charge of Maryam,

280

welcomed by Khusrau Par-
wiz, 280

wroth with Khusrau Par-
wiz, 290

watches fight between Khus-
rau Parwiz and Bahram
Chubina, 297

entertained at banquet by
Khusrau Parwiz, 309

quarrel of, with Bandwi,

309
threat of, to Khusrau Par-
wiz, 310
reconciled to Bandwi, 311
returns to Rum, 312
Nizimi, Persian poet, 192
Noldeke, Professor, 71, 188
on Romance of Bahram
Chubina, 73
Note on Pronunciation, xvi
Nu’man bin Munzir, 188
put to death, 190
Nushirwan, Shah, v, 3
71, 72, 86 seg, 98,
169, 198, 200, 205,
300, 312, 313, 377
precautions of, as to
cessor, 3

S€q.,
129,
209,

suc-

* See Vol.1 p. 396 sole

Google

<pb n="441"/>
INDEX

Nushirwdn, goes hunting with

Buzurjmihr, 4

suspects and
Buzurjmihr, 5

treats Buzurjmihr with in-
creasing mgour, 7, 8

reconciled to Buzurjmihr, 9

questioned by archimages,
14 seq., 28 seq.

gives judgment against his
own son, 16

chief cook of, aggrieved, 18

counsels Hurmuzd, 25 seg.

writes to console Czsar’s
son and successor, 43

wroth at answer received, 45

invades Rim, 46

success of, 47
checked, 47

in want of money, 47

takes counsel with Buzurj-
mihr, 47

refuses advances from a
shoemaker, 50, 71

high esteem of, for scribes,
50

grants peace to, and takes
tribute from, Rimans, 52

returns to Taisafun, 53

sons of, 56, 63

instructs Buzurjmihr to
prove Hurmuzd, 56 seq.

testament of, in favour of,
and last counsels to, Hur-
muzd, 61 seq.

directions of, as to inter-
ment, 65

hall of, shattered, 68

death of, 69, 71

system of administration of,
71

marriage of, with Khan’s
daughter referred to, 72,
97 seq.

ministers of, put to death
by Hurmuzd, 81 seg.

his choice of Hurmuzd,
story of, 87

palace of, 193

disgraces

Google

441
O

ONAGER, Bahram Chutbina
guided by, 156, 158

Owls and Crows, story of, 263
and note

Ox-hide or skin filled with gold
as tribute, 46, 52, 53

Oxus (Jihun), 72

P

PaGE, of Nushirwan, 5 seq.
relative of Buzurjmihr, 5
instructed by Buzurjmihr, 6
takes messages between

Nushirwan and Buzurj-
mihr, 6 seq.

Pahlavi, middle Persian language

of Ashkanian (Parthian)
and Sasdnian times, 73, 74

Paidawas{s, 381 and note

Paighu, 190

Paikar-i-Gurd, melody, 398 and

note

Papak, tribal king, 214, 219 and

note, 285

daughter of, 214

Parmiuda (see too Khan of Chin),

vi, 75, 117, 130, 136 seq.,
146, 149 seq., 164, 174

hears of Bahram Chibina’s
victory and takes counsel,
131

marches toward Jihuin, 131

approaches Balkh, 134

attacks and is defeated by
Bahram Chibina, 134
seq.

escapes to Awdza, 138

besieged by Bahram Chu-
bina, 138 seq.

negotiates surrender of
AwaAza with Bahrdm Chi-
bina, 139 seq.

surrenders Aw4za and sets
out for fran, 143

insulted by Bahram Chut-
bina, 144

Bahram Chiubina tries to
placate, 145
<pb n="442"/>
442

Pars (Persis, Farsistan), country
on eastern shore of Per-
sian Gulf, 109 mote, 112,
216, 241, 393, 395
Parthian, Parthians, 73
Parwiz, meaning of, 187
Pashan, battle of, 397 and note
Persia, 195
Persian, Persians, 24 note, 42, 71,
75, 121, 188 seqg., 194, 208,
273, 282, 286 and passim
wisdom-literature, 3
conquest of Yaman, 24 nole
empire, war of, with Rum, 41
raid Syria, 41
defeat by Romans referred
to, 72
war with Turks, 72
Book of Kings, 73
Tabari. See Tabarti.
= Bahram Chubina, 113
=Hurmuzd, 116, 117
prince= Bahram Chiubina,
319
Phocas, Eastern Roman Em-
peror, 187, 189, 193, 194
Photius, quoted, 191
Piran, Turdnian hero, 414
Piriz, Shah, 73, 75, 168, 242,
2.45, 207, 285
Piriz, father of Ustad, 296
Pisces, constellation, 51, 342
Pleiades, 53, 158
Polo, 246, 247, 258, 371
—-sticks, 247
Prelates as warriors, 47 and note
Pronunciation, Note on, xvi
Proverb, 187

Q

QUEEN OF CHIN (wife of the
Khan), 190
daughter of, slain by lion-
ape, 322
asks Bahram Chubina to
avenge her daughter, 324
steward of, plots with Khar-
rad against Bahram Chu-
bina, 335

Google

INDEX

Queen of Chin, daughter of,
cured by Kharrad, 336
grants boon to Kharrdad, 338
disgraced, 344

Rh

Rar, city and district near Tih-
ran, X, 72, 155, 166, 171,
173, 174, 18a, 214, 216,
240
seat of Arsacid power, 72
Bahram Chubina goes to,
306
Khusrau Parwiz oppresses,
305
miscry of, 367
Gurdya delivers, 368
Rakka (Warigh g.v.), city, 188
Ram, franian warrior, 291
Ram Barzin, Persian official, 313
Rangwi, frdnian warrior, 296
Rasafa, 188
Reseph, 188
Responses, of Nushirwan, v, 14
seqg., 28 seq.
Rhyme-word, Firdausi and, 397
nate
Roman, Romans, 188, 189, 195
Empire, war of, with Persian,
41, 193
defeat Bahram Chubina, 7
Ruhham, a Mihran, temp. Piruz,

3
Rim, astern Roman Empire,
vill, ix, 10, T1, 15, 19 and
passim
‘brocade of, 157, 173, 278,
337, 37. 374
philosophers of, 279, 382
robes of, 308
captured cities of, restored
to, 312
Riman, Rimans, ix, 15, 45
seq., 52, 53, 93, 122, 214
and passim
envoy, 8 seq.
surrender to Nushirwan, 47
entrench themselves, 47
<pb n="443"/>
INDEX

Ruman, Ruimans, sue for peace
and pay tribute, 51 seq.
architect, 193, 401
marches, 252
robes, 253
helms, 105, 276, 417
eunuchs, 279
worsted by Bahram Chu-
bina, 292
artificers imprisoned by
Khusrau Parwiz, 402
released by Khusrau Par-
wiz, 403
Rus (Russia), 406
Rustam, Iranian hero, 106, 177,
219, 223, 332
fight of, with Ashkabus,
referred to, 75
conduct of, in Hamavaran,
104, 168
banner of, bestowed on
Bahram Chubina, 105,
21
Rustam, brother of Farrukhzad,
413 and nole
revolt ot, 413
Ruzbih, scribe, 252

S

SABZ DAR SABZ, melody, 399 and
nole

Sada, feast, 68, 133, 216, 313

Sage, saying of, 155

Sakila, Mount, v, 41

stronghold of,

Rumans, 47

Saklab (Slavonia), 379

Salm, eldest son of Faridiuin, 266,

taken by

270, 300, 376 nole, 378;

381
Sim, frdnian hero, 223
Samarkand, city in Turkistan,

377

Sambaz, [rdnian chief, speech of,
242

Sapandarmad, month and day,

331
Sapor II, Shah, 41

Google

443
Sarf, city in Mazandaran, 168,
341, 355, 392
Sarkab, Ruman general, 281, 292
Sarkash (Sergius), minstrel, xi,
193, 398 seq., 406
story of, 396
disgrace of, 399
Sisan, eponym of Sasanian
dynasty, 219, 220, 330,
341
Sasdnian, SdsAnians, 65, 72, 73,
214, 262, 330, 413 nole
rivalry with Arsacids, 73
usage, 190
architecture, 193
empire, 193
race, 285, 386 note
Saturn, planet, 24, 66, 321, 392,
395
Sawa, ruler of the Turks, vi, 74,
94 Seqg., 100 seqg., 107, 108,

110 seq., 123, 129, 132,
133, 135, 137, 139, 104,
169, 174, 216, 219, 222,
224, 240

=Chao-wou, 72

attacks Hurmuzd, 92

letter of, to Hurmuzd, 93

prophecy about, 98

Hurmuzd sends Kharrdad,
son of Barzin, to, 110

hears of Bahram Chibina’s
army and blames Khar-
rad, 110

offers of, to Bahram Chi-
bina, 113 seq., 117 seq.

empioys sorcery against the
ranians, 123

defeated and slain, 126

head of, set on lance, 130

wealth of, sent to Hurmuzd,
133

Scribe, scribes, office of, highly

esteemed by Nushirwan,

50
put to death by Hurmuzd,

71
Seleucia (Bih Ardshfr), city on
right bank of Tigris oppo-
site to Ctesiphon (Taisa-
fun), 189, 194, 196
<pb n="444"/>
444 INDEX

Sergiopolis, 188
Sergius, Saint and Martyr, 188
patron saint of Khusrau
Parwiz, 188, 195
Roman leader in Tabari, 188
Sergius (Sarkash), minstrel, 193
Seven, Stages, Story of, 171
founts, 392
Climes. See Climes.
and forty Shahs, 395 and
nole
Shabdiz, steed of Khusrau Par-
wiz, 407
Shadward, treasure, 406 and note
Shahnama, 3, 41, 42, 71, 72, 74
séq., 187 Seqg., 191, 192
Prose, compilers of, referred
to, 71, 73
Shahran Guraz, Iranian warrior,
speech of. 239
Shahrbaraz (Gurdz q.v.), franian
general, 194 .
revolt of, 195
sons of, 196
Shakespeare, quoted, 187
Sham (Syria), 170
Shamta, 195, 196
Shapur, son of Ardshir, Shah,
265
Shapur, son of Urmuzd, Shah, 41
Shapur of Rai, 72

Shapur, [ranian warrior, viii,
202, 225, 257, 259, 269,
292, 296
deceived by Cexsar’s talis-
man, 273

praised by Caesar, 279
Bahram Chubina writes to,

285
receives Istakhr and Darab-
gird, 313

Sheep’s heads, Bahram Chubina
and the, 74, 107
omen of, reported to Hur-
muzd, ro8
Sher-Kappi, 322 note
Shirin, wife of Khusrau Parwiz,

xi, 187, I94, 363, 353,
407

enmity of, to Shirwi, 159,
IQ, 193

Google

|

Shirin, account of, 192
Khusrau and, Persian poem,
192
meaning of, 193
Maryam murdered by, 193,

389
a Christian 195
warns Khusrau Parwiz

against Gurdya, 364
Khusrau Parwiz and, Story
of, 382
married to, 386
gilded chamber given to, 389

hears Kubdd_ proclaimed
Shah, 416

informs Khusrau Parwiz,
16

4
Shirwi (Kubad q.v.), Shah, x, xi,
188, 190, 371 seq.
Shirin’s enmity to, 18g, Ior,
193
internment of, 194, 196, 391
released, 196, 415
secret and public names of,

372, 416
astrologers consulted at
birth of, 372

ill-omened horoscope of, 372
referred to, 373
Khusrau Parwiz gives Czx-
sar’s gifts to, 381
boorishness of, 390
Khusrau Parwiz’ displeasure
with, 390
sends to take Khusrau Par-
wiz, 419
Shirzil, franian warrior, 296
Shiz (Takht-i-Sulaiman), seat of
the Magi in Azarbdaijén,
Igo
Shoemaker, v, 42
offer of, to advance money
to Nushirwan, 48
rejected, 50, 71
Shustar, city in Khuzistin, 381
Sikandar (Alexander the Great),
52, 204, 217, 242, 262,
381, 387, 392
Simah Barzin, scribe, vi
Hurmuzd plots against, 85
seq.

<pb n="445"/>
INDEX

Sipansar, franian warrior, 293
Siyawush, son of Kai Kaus, 104,
349, 395 note
goods of, 148, 151
Siyiwush, Irdnian chief,

128, 163, 187, 233
son of = Bahram, 247
Slavs, 194
Sol, planet, 395
Son of Firdaus{i, death of, 1x, 190
Sophia, Empress, her treatment
of Narses, 76
Speech, modes of, 30
Spica, star, 379
Sufarai, frdnian chief, 72, 75,
168, 285
Sukhta, treasure, 406 and nole
Sumai, 195
Sunday, 378, 380
Surtish, angel, the messenger of
Urmuzd, ix, 173
saves Khusrau Parwiz from
Bahram Chubina,_ 189,
299
Syria, 193
raided by Persians, 41

Vill,

T

TaBAR{, historian, 73, 75 Seq.,
188

Persian, 42, 73 seq., 187 seq.

Arabic, 42, 73, 75, 187, 190,

195
Table of Contents, v
Tahmuras, Shah, 277, 332, 376
Taisafuan (Ctesiphon g.v.), xi,
city on left bank of Tigris,
53, 90, 109 note, 118, 173,
175, 180, 182, 229, 241
Nushirwdan returns to, 53
Bahram Chhbina marches
from province of, 106
Khusrau Parwiz imprisoned
at, 421
Taj, 71
TAkd{s, throne of, xi, 391
account of, 391 seq.
added to by Jamasp, 392
Takht-i-Bustan, 192

Google

|

445

See Mada’ in
(Shiz, g.v.),

Takht-i-Khusrau.
Takht-i-Sulaiman
189

Talisman, Cesar’s, viii
described, 271
deceives Persian envoys, 272
mastered by Kharrad, 274
Tamuz, 77 nole
Taraz, city north-cast of Tdsh-
kand, 370
Idols of, 370
Theodore, brother of Heraclius,
194
Theodosius (Niyatus), 189
Tiberius, Eastern Roman Em-
peror, 42
Tigris (Arwand), river, 193, 194
Tir, month, 394
Treasures, of Khusrau Parwiz,
406
Tukhar, [rdnian chicf, 228
takes letter to Cesar, 263
Tukh4r, frdnian general, con-
spires against Khusrau
Parwiz, 414
releases Shirwi, 415
Tukhara, franian warrior, 296
son of, 314
Tur, second son of Faridtn, 266,
300, 376 note, 378
Turan (Turkistan), 118,
130, 242, 329, 33!,
350, 376, 405, 407
Turdnian, Turdnians, 123, 320
Turk, Turks, 95, 103, 121, 135,
136, 138 seq., 142, 164,
169, 170, 189, 316, 320,
349, 352
war of, with Persians, 72
prophesied, 98
= Sawa, 98
defeated, 126
find Sawa's corpse, 127
sorcerer, sends ill dream to
Bahram Chubina, 121,
128
put to death, 129
heads of chiefs of, sent to
Hurmuzd, 130
retreat to Turan, 131
three, the, 187, 204

123,
349,

<pb n="446"/>
440

Turk, Turks, one of, attacks
Khusrau Parwiz, 220
reproved by Bahram

Chubina, 221
lead night-attack on
Khusrau Parwiz, 227
= Makatira, 319
= Kulin, 345
defeated by Yalan-sina, 353
Turkistan (Turan), 324, 336,
363, 376, 377, 407
Turkman, Turkmans, 377
=Turk, 87, 89, 94, 217
Tus, [ranian hero, 168
Tuwurg, brother of Khan, x,
364
reports flight of Gurdya, 351
sent in pursuit, 351
parleys with Gurdya, 352

U

Urmuzp, the Good Principle, 285
Urmuzd, Shah, 41

Urmuzd, franian warrior, 296
Urumiah, lake, 195

Ustad, Irdnian warrior, 296

V

VENus, planet, 152, 359, 394, 395
Virgo, constellation, 359

W

WariGu, city on the Euphrates,
188, 253, 257, 280
Khusrau Parwiz takes up
his abode at, 257
Wash, city, 24 and note
West, gateway of, 369 and note
Wisdom, apportionment of, 202
literature (Persian), 3

INDEX

y

YacAn-sfna (Mardanshadh), bro-
ther of Bahram Chubina.
74, 102, 122, 135, 135,
157, 163, 169, 204, 255,
291, 296 seg., 303, 319,
356, 357
goes hunting with Bahram
Chubina, 156
pursues and brings
archscribe, 159
speech of, 165, 170
worsted by Khusrau Par-
wiz, 229
commands the centre, 289
Bahram Chubina makes, his
mandatory, 342
defeats the Turks, 353
negotiates marnage between
Gurdya and Gustaham,
357
Yaman, south-western Arabia,
98
monarch of, 16
conquered by Persians, 24
note
curtains of, 148, 151
Yazdagird IIT, Shah, 55, 73

back

Yazdan, 75
Yazdanbakhsh (Ayin Gashasp
q.v.), 75, 76

Yazdin, 195, 196
Yundan, Greece, 258

Z

ZaB, lesser, tributary of Tigris,
1&9
Zabulistan,* 369
Zad Farrukh, suggests Bahram
Chuibina to Hurmuzd, 99
speech of. 241
Zagros, mountain-range in west-
ern Iran, 189
Zahhak, Shah, 218, 239,
387, 391
father of, referred to, 387

241,

* See Vol, i, p. 396 note

Google
<pb n="447"/>
INDEX 447

Zl, father of Rustam, 223 Zarduhsht, visits [zid Gashasp in
Zandavasta, 96, 246, 283, 312 prison, 82

quoted, 218, 240 visit of, reported to Hur-
Zarduhsht (Zoroaster), 67, 213, muzd, 83

308 poisoned byHurmuzd;83 seq.

saying of, 218, 240 Zarmihr, son of Sifarai, 169

Zarduhsht, high priest, vi, 81 | Zhangwi, Turkman noble, 331
Zodiac, 394

END OF VOL. VIII.

Google
<pb n="448"/>
Eger eee — ——ee ee

Google
<pb n="449"/>
es Pe ee ee ll Ce a Gar ee 8"

Google
<pb n="450"/>
Ae eh te +
. ee

dteeF. + 2

Google
<pb n="451"/>
erpgg ff

DO NOT REMOVE
OR
MUTILATE CARD

Google
<pb n="452"/>
~ Digitized by Cso le
WOR

———
Original from
_ UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN

poi

or ineet hee deal ide Pad Wd ist iH sivtovt lot

Ai awe

